AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

    

!1

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

STEERING COMMITTEE 

Yoav Shoham (chair) 

Stanford University 

Raymond Perrault 

SRI International 

Erik Brynjolfsson 

MIT 

Jack Clark 

OpenAI 

PROJECT MANAGER 

Calvin LeGassick 

    

!2

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction to the AI Index 2017 Annual Report 
Overview 
Volume of Activity 

Academia 

Published Papers 
Course Enrollment 
Conference Attendance 

Industry 

AI-Related Startups 
AI-Related Startup Funding 
Job Openings 
Robot Imports 

Open Source Software 

GitHub Project Statistics 

Public Interest 

Sentiment of Media Coverage 

Technical Performance  

Vision 

Object Detection 
Visual Question Answering 

Natural Language Understanding 

Parsing 
Machine Translation 
Question Answering 
Speech Recognition 

5 
7 
9 
9 
9 
11 
14 
16 
16 
17 
18 
21 
23 
23 
25 
25 
26 
26 
26 
27 
28 
28 
29 
30 
31 

    

!3

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Theorem Proving 
SAT Solving 

Derivative Measures 
Towards Human-Level Performance? 
What’s Missing? 
Expert Forum 
Get Involved! 
Acknowledgements 
Appendix A: Data Description & Collection Methodology 

32 
33 
34 
37 
41 
44 
68 
70 
72

    

!4

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

INTRODUCTION TO THE AI INDEX 2017 
ANNUAL REPORT 

Artificial Intelligence has leapt to the forefront of global discourse, garnering increased 
attention from practitioners, industry leaders, policymakers, and the general public. 
The diversity of opinions and debates gathered from news articles this year illustrates 
just how broadly AI is being investigated, studied, and applied. 

However, the field of AI is still evolving rapidly and even experts have a hard time 
understanding and tracking progress across the field. 
 

    

!5

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Without the relevant data for reasoning about the state of AI technology, we are 
essentially “flying blind” in our conversations and decision-making related to AI. 

We are essentially “flying blind” in our conversations and 
decision-making related to Artificial Intelligence. 

Created and launched as a project of the One Hundred Year Study on AI at Stanford 
University (AI100), the AI Index is an open, not-for-profit project to track activity and 
progress in AI. It aims to facilitate an informed conversation about AI that is grounded 
in data. This is the inaugural annual report of the AI Index, and in this report we look at 
activity and progress in Artificial Intelligence through a range of perspectives. We 
aggregate data that exists freely on the web, contribute original data, and extract new 
metrics from combinations of data series. 

All of the data used to generate this report will be openly available on the AI Index 
website at aiindex.org. Providing data, however, is just the beginning. To become truly 
useful, the AI Index needs support from a larger community. Ultimately, this report is a 
call for participation. You have the ability to provide data, analyze collected data, and 
make a wish list of what data you think needs to be tracked. Whether you have 
answers or questions to provide, we hope this report inspires you to reach out to the 
AI Index and become part of the effort to ground the conversation about AI.

    

!6

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

OVERVIEW 
The first half of the report showcases data aggregated by the AI Index team. This is 
followed by a discussion of key areas the report does not address, expert commentary 
on the trends displayed in the report, and a call to action to support our data collection 
efforts and join the conversation about measuring and communicating progress in AI 
technology. 

Data Sections 

The data in the report is broken into four primary parts:  

• Volume of Activity 
• Technical Performance 
• Derivative Measures 
• Towards Human-Level Performance? 

The Volume of Activity metrics capture the “how much” aspects of the field, like 
attendance at AI conferences and VC investments into startups developing AI 
systems. The Technical Performance metrics capture the “how good” aspects; for 
example, how well computers can understand images and prove mathematical 
theorems. The methodology used to collect each data set is detailed in the appendix.

These first two sets of data confirm what is already well recognized: all graphs are “up 
and to the right,” reflecting the increased activity in AI efforts as well as the progress 
of the technology. In the Derivative Measures section we investigate the relationship 
between trends. We also introduce an exploratory measure, the AI Vibrancy Index, that 
combines trends across academia and industry to quantify the liveliness of AI as a 
field. 

When measuring the performance of AI systems, it is natural to look for comparisons 
to human performance. In the Towards Human-Level Performance section we outline a 
short list of notable areas where AI systems have made significant progress towards 

    

!7

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

matching or exceeding human performance. We also discuss the difficulties of such 
comparisons and introduce the appropriate caveats.

Discussion Sections 

Following the display of the collected data, we include some discussion of the trends 
this report highlights and important areas this report entirely omits.

Part of this discussion centers on the limitations of the report. This report is biased 
towards US-centric data sources and may overestimate progress in technical areas by 
only tracking well-defined benchmarks. It also lacks demographic breakdowns of data 
and contains no information about AI Research & Development investments by 
governments and corporations. These areas are deeply important and we intend to 
tackle them in future reports. We further discuss these limitations and others in the 
What’s Missing section of the report.

As the report’s limitations illustrate, the AI Index will always paint a partial picture. For 
this reason, we include subjective commentary from a cross-section of AI experts. This 
Expert Forum helps animate the story behind the data in the report and adds 
interpretation the report lacks.

Finally, where the experts’ dialogue ends, your opportunity to Get Involved begins. We 
will need the feedback and participation of a larger community to address the issues 
identified in this report, uncover issues we have omitted, and build a productive 
process for tracking activity and progress in Artificial Intelligence. 

    

!8

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

VOLUME OF ACTIVITY 
Academia 
Published Papers 
view more information in appendix A1 

The number of Computer Science papers published and tagged with the keyword 
“Artificial Intelligence” in the Scopus database of academic papers. 
 

9x The number of AI papers produced each year has 

increased by more than 9x since 1996.

    

!9

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

A comparison of the annual publishing rates of different categories of academic 
papers, relative to their publishing rates in 1996. The graph displays the growth of 
papers across all fields, papers within the Computer Science field, and AI papers within 
the Computer Science field. 
 

The data illustrates that growth in AI publishing is driven by more than a growing 
interest in the broader field of Computer Science. Concretely, while the number of 
papers within the general field of Computer Science has grown by 6x since 1996 the 
number of AI papers produced each year has increased by more than 9x in that same 
period. 

    

!10

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Course Enrollment 
view more information in appendix A2 

The number of students enrolled in introductory Artificial Intelligence & Machine 
Learning courses at Stanford University. 

ML is a subfield of AI. We highlight ML courses because of their rapid enrollment 
growth and because ML techniques are critical to many recent AI achievements. 
 

11x

Introductory AI class enrollment at Stanford has 
increased 11x since 1996.

Note: The dip in Stanford ML enrollment for the 2016 academic year 
reflects an administrative quirk that year, not student interest. Details in 
appendix.

    

!11

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

We highlight Stanford because our data on other universities is limited. However, we 
can project that past enrollment trends at other universities are similar to Stanford’s. 
 

Note: Many universities have offered AI courses since before the 90’s. The graphs above represent the years 
for which we found available data.

    

!12

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Note: Many universities have offered ML courses since before the 90’s. The graphs above represent the 
years for which we found available data.

 
It is worth noting that these graphs represent a specific sliver of the higher education 
landscape, and the data is not necessarily representative of trends in the broader 
landscape of academic institutions. 

    

!13

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Conference Attendance 
view more information in appendix A3 

The number of attendees at a representative sample of AI conferences. The data is 
split into large conferences (over 1000 attendees in 2016) and small conferences 
(under 1000 attendees in 2016). 
 

Shifting 
Focus

These attendance numbers show that research 
focus has shifted from symbolic reasoning  
to machine learning and deep learning.

Note: Most of the conferences have existed since the 1980s. The data 
above represents the years attendance data was recorded.

    

!14

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Steady 
Progress

Despite shifting focus, there is still a 
smaller research community making  
steady progress on symbolic reasoning 
methods in AI.

 

    

!15

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Industry 
AI-Related Startups 
view more information in appendix A4 

The number of active venture-backed US private companies developing AI systems. 
 

14x

The number of active US startups developing AI 
systems has increased 14x since 2000.

    

!16

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

AI-Related Startup Funding 
view more information in appendix A5 

The amount of annual funding by VC’s into US AI startups across all funding stages. 

6x

Annual VC investment into US startups developing AI 
systems has increased 6x since 2000.

    

!17

!
!
 
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Job Openings 
view more information in appendix A6 

We obtained AI-related job growth data from two online job listing platforms, Indeed 
and Monster. AI-related jobs were identified with titles and keywords in descriptions. 

The growth of the share of US jobs requiring AI skills on the Indeed.com platform. 
Growth is a multiple of the share of jobs on the Indeed platform that required AI skills 
in the US in January 2013. 

4.5x

The share of jobs requiring AI skills in the US has 
grown 4.5x since 2013.

    

!18

!
!
 
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

The growth of the share of jobs requiring AI skills on the Indeed.com platform, by 
country. 
 

Note: Despite the rapid growth of the Canada and UK AI job markets, Indeed.com reports they are 
respectively still 5% and 27% of the absolute size of the US AI job market.

    

!19

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

The total number of AI job openings posted on the Monster platform in a given year, 
broken down by specific required skills. 
 

Note: A single AI-related job may be double counted (belong to multiple categories). For 
example, a job may speciﬁcally require natural language processing and computer vision skills.

    

!20

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Robot Imports 
view more information in appendix A7 

The number of imports of industrial robot units into North America and globally.

    

!21

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

The growth of imports of industrial robot units into North America and globally. 

    

!22

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Open Source Software 
GitHub Project Statistics 
view more information in appendix A8 

The number of times the TensorFlow and Scikit-Learn software packages have been 
Starred on GitHub. TensorFlow and Scikit-Learn are popular software packages for 
deep learning and machine learning. 
 

Software developers “Star” software projects on GitHub to indicate projects they are 
interested in, express appreciation for projects, and navigate to projects quickly. Stars 
can provide a signal for developer interest in and usage of software. 

    

!23

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

The number of times various AI & ML software packages have been Starred on 
GitHub. 
 

Note: Forks of GitHub repositories follow almost identical trends (though, the absolute number 
of forks and stars for each repo diﬀer). See the appendix for info on gathering Forks data.

    

!24

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Public Interest 
Sentiment of Media Coverage 
view more information in appendix A9 

The percentage of popular media articles that contain the term “Artificial Intelligence” 
and that are classified as either Positive or Negative articles. 
 

    

!25

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

TECHNICAL PERFORMANCE  
Vision 
Object Detection 
view more information in appendix A10 

The performance of AI systems on the object detection task in the Large Scale Visual 
Recognition Challenge (LSVRC) Competition. 

2.5%

Error rates for image labeling have fallen 
from 28.5% to below 2.5% since 2010.

    

!26

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

 
Visual Question Answering 
view more information in appendix A11 

The performance of AI systems on a task to give open-ended answers to questions 
about images. 
 

Note: The VQA 1.0 data set has already been surpassed by the VQA 2.0 data set and it is 
unclear how much further attention the VQA 1.0 data set will receive.

    

!27

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Natural Language Understanding 
Parsing 
view more information in appendix A12 

The performance of AI systems on a task to determine the syntactic structure of 
sentences. 
 

    

!28

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Machine Translation 
view more information in appendix A13 

The performance of AI systems on a task to translate news between English and 
German. 
 

    

!29

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Question Answering 
view more information in appendix A14 

The performance of AI systems on a task to find the answer to a question within a 
document. 

    

!30

!
!
 
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Speech Recognition 
view more information in appendix A15 

The performance of AI systems on a task to recognize speech from phone call audio. 

    

!31

!
!
 
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Theorem Proving 

view more information in appendix A16 

The average tractability of a large set of theorem proving problems for Automatic 
Theorem Provers. “Tractability” measures the fraction of state-of-the-art Automatic 
Theorem Provers that can solve a problem. See appendix for details about the 
“tractability” metric. 
 

Note: Average tractability can go down if state-of-the-art solvers are introduced that perform 
well on novel problems but poorly on problems other solvers are good at.

    

!32

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

SAT Solving 

view more information in appendix A17 

The percentage of problems solved by competitive SAT solvers on industry-applicable 
problems. 
 

    

!33

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

DERIVATIVE MEASURES 
We can glean additional insights from the measurements in the previous sections by 
examining the relationships between trends. This section demonstrates how the data 
gathered by the AI Index can be used for further analysis and to spur the development 
of refined and wholly original metrics. 

As a case-study for this demonstration, we look at trends across academia and 
industry to explore their dynamics. Further, we aggregate these metrics into a 
combined AI Vibrancy Index. 

Academia-Industry Dynamics 

To explore the relationship between AI-related activity in academia and industry, we 
first select a few representative measurements from the previous sections. In 
particular, we look at AI paper publishing, combined enrollment in introductory AI and 
ML courses at Stanford, and VC investments into AI-related startups. 

These metrics represent quantities that cannot be compared directly: papers 
published, students enrolled, and amount invested. In order to analyze the relationship 
between these trends, we first normalize each measurement starting at the year 2000. 
This allows us to compare how the metrics have grown instead of the absolute values 
of the metrics over time. 

    

!34

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Note: The dip in enrollment for the 2016 academic year reﬂects an administrative quirk that 
year, not student interest. Details in appendix A2.

 
The data shows that, initially, academic activity (publishing and enrollment) drove 
steady progress. Around 2010 investors started to take note and by 2013 became the 
drivers of the steep increase in total activity. Since then, academia has caught up with 
the exuberance of industry. 

    

!35

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

The AI Vibrancy Index 

The AI Vibrancy Index aggregates the measurements from academia and industry 
(publishing, enrollment and VC investment) to quantify the liveliness of AI as a field. 
To compute the AI Vibrancy Index, we average normalized publishing, enrollment and 
investment metrics over time. 
 

We hope this brief investigation sparks interest in how metrics from the AI Index can 
be further analyzed and creates discussion about what derived measures may be 
useful to track over time. 

    

!36

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

TOWARDS HUMAN-LEVEL 
PERFORMANCE? 
It is natural to look for comparisons between the performance of AI systems and 
humans on the same task. Obviously, computers are vastly superior to humans in 
certain tasks; 1970-era hand calculators can perform arithmetic better than humans. 
However, the competence of AI systems becomes more difficult to assess when 
dealing with more general tasks like answering questions, playing games, and making 
medical diagnoses. 

Tasks for AI systems are often framed in narrow contexts for the sake of making 
progress on a specific problem or application. While machines may exhibit stellar 
performance on a certain task, performance may degrade dramatically if the task is 
modified even slightly. For example, a human who can read Chinese characters would 
likely understand Chinese speech, know something about Chinese culture and even 
make good recommendations at Chinese restaurants. In contrast, very different AI 
systems would be needed for each of these tasks.

Machine performance may degrade dramatically if the 
original task is modified even slightly. 

Despite the difficulty of comparing human and AI systems, it is interesting to 
catalogue credible claims that computers have reached or exceeded human-level 
performance. Still, it is important to remember that these achievements say nothing 
about the ability of these systems to generalize. We also note the list below contains 
many game playing achievements. Games provide a relatively simple, controlled, 
experimental environment and so are often used for AI research. 

    

!37

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Milestones

Below is a brief description of the achievements and their circumstances. Some 
milestones represent significant progress towards human performance and others 
represent super-human performance achievements. 

 

1980

Othello

In the 1980s Kai-Fu Lee and Sanjoy Mahajan developed BILL, a Bayesian 
learning-based system for playing the board game Othello. In 1989 the 
program won the US national tournament of computer players, and beat 
the highest ranked US player, Brian Rose, 56-8. In 1997 a program named 
Logistello won every game in a six game match against the reigning 
Othello world champion. 

1995

Checkers

In 1952, Arthur Samuels built a series of programs that played the game of 
checkers and improved via self-play. However, it was not until 1995 that a 
checkers-playing program, Chinook, beat the world champion. 

1997

Chess

Some computer scientists in the 1950s predicted that a computer would 
defeat the human chess champion by 1967, but it was not until 1997 that 
IBM’s DeepBlue system beat chess champion Gary Kasparov. Today, chess 
programs running on smartphones can play at the grandmaster level.

    

!38

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

2011

Jeopardy!

In 2011, the IBM Watson computer system competed on the popular quiz-
show Jeopardy! against former winners Brad Rutter and Ken Jennings. 
Watson won the first place prize of $1 million. 
 

2015

Atari Games

In 2015, a team at Google DeepMind used a reinforcement learning system 
to learn how to play 49 Atari games. The system was able to achieve 
human-level performance in a majority of the games (e.g., Breakout), 
though some are still significantly out of reach (e.g., Montezuma’s 
Revenge). 

2016

Object Detection in ImageNet

In 2016, the error rate of automatic labeling of ImageNet declined from 
28% in 2010 to less than 3%. Human performance is about 5%. 
 

2016

Go

In March of 2016, the AlphaGo system developed by the Google DeepMind 
team beat Lee Sedol, one of the world’s greatest Go players, 4-1. 
DeepMind then released Alpha Go Master, which defeated the top ranked 
player, Ke Jie, in March of 2017. In October 2017 a Nature paper detailed 
yet another new version, AlphaGo Zero, which beat the original AlphaGo 
system 100-0. 

    

!39

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

2017

Skin Cancer Classification

In a 2017 Nature article, Esteva et al. describe an AI system trained on a 
data set of 129,450 clinical images of 2,032 different diseases and 
compare its diagnostic performance against 21 board-certified 
dermatologists. They find the AI system capable of classifying skin cancer 
at a level of competence comparable to the dermatologists. 

2017

Speech Recognition on Switchboard

In 2017,  Microsoft and IBM both achieved performance within close range 
of “human-parity” speech recognition in the limited Switchboard domain. 

2017

Poker

In January 2017, a program from CMU called Libratus defeated four top 
human players in a tournament of 120,000 games of two-player, heads up, 
no-limit Texas Hold’em. In February 2017, a program from the University of 
Alberta called DeepStack played a group of 11 professional players more 
than 3,000 games each. DeepStack won enough poker games to prove the 
statistical significance of its skill over the professionals. 

2017

Ms. Pac-Man

Maluuba, a deep learning team acquired by Microsoft, created an AI 
system that learned how to reach the game’s maximum point value of 
999,900 on Atari 2600. 

    

!40

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 
WHAT’S MISSING? 
This inaugural annual report covers a lot of ground, but certainly not all of it. Many 
important areas were omitted for lack of available data, time, or both. We hope to 
address the limitations below in future editions of the report. 

We also believe it will take the support of the broader community to effectively engage 
in this broad range of challenges, and we invite you to reach out to the AI Index if you 
have ideas or relevant data for tackling these challenges.

Technical Performance 

We did not cover progress in many important technical areas. For some areas there are 
not clear standardized benchmarks (e.g. dialogue systems, planning, continuous 
control in robotics). In other areas it is hard to measure performance when there has 
not been significant progress, like in commonsense reasoning. And still, other areas 
are waiting to be tracked but we simply have not had the opportunity to collect the 
data (e.g. recommender systems, standardized testing). 

Tracking areas that have traditionally lacked concrete measurements may also 
facilitate a more sober assessment of AI progress. Progress is typically tracked 
consistently when good progress has been made. As a result, this report may present 
an overly optimistic picture. 

Indeed, chatbot dialog falls far short of human dialog and we lack widely accepted 
benchmarks for progress in this area. Similarly, while today’s AI systems have far less 
common sense reasoning than that of a five-year-old child, it is unclear how to 
quantify this as a technical metric. Expanding the coverage of the report may help 
correct for this optimistic bias. Additionally, any effort to develop effective reporting 
metrics in one of these more difficult areas may be a contribution in itself that spurs 
further progress in the area. 

    

!41

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

International Coverage

This report is very US-centric, despite the significant amount of AI activity and 
progress across the world. As a single example, the level of investment and activity in 
China today is astounding but outside the scope of this report. While we did not have 
the time or ability to collect such data for the inaugural AI Index report, future editions 
of the report will need better international coverage.

Diversity & Inclusion

Those researching and deploying AI systems will play a significant role in shaping the 
impact of AI on society. If we intend to contribute relevant data to discussions about 
the ultimate impact of Artificial Intelligence on society, then we must quantify who 
gets to participate in conversations about AI as well as measure who holds the power 
to influence future AI research and deployment. 

This inaugural report contains no breakdown of data by sex, race, gender, ethnicity, 
sexuality or other characteristics. How many women get the opportunity to contribute 
to AI research in industry?  What percentage of AI startups in the US are founded by 
black men? These questions are intimately related to the power dynamics at play 
within the technology and venture capital industries as well as broader systemic forces 
of discrimination. No one study can frame the conversations about these complex 
dynamics, but we believe an effort like the AI Index must engage in these questions to 
authentically analyze the full impact of AI on our society. 

Government and Corporate Investment

The venture capital investment data showcased in this report focuses solely on the US 
and represents a very small sliver of total investment in AI Research & Development 
(R&D).

    

!42

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Governments and corporations have made substantial investments in AI R&D. While 
this data may be more difficult to collect, we intend to pursue data that highlights 
government and corporate investments in the US and internationally. We anticipate 
that it will require a highly coordinated, collaborative effort to effectively make 
progress in this area.

Impact in Specific Verticals

We aspire to provide relevant metrics for conversations about AI’s impact in 
healthcare, automotive, finance, education, and beyond. These areas are perhaps the 
most important and most difficult to get a handle on. Relevant metrics in these areas 
are difficult to identify and aggregate because they call for additional understanding of 
these disparate domains. We plan to branch into these areas in collaboration with 
experts in these domains and others. 

Mitigating Societal Risks

Issues associated with societal risks resulting from AI are left unaddressed in this 
report. In the future, we hope to provide metrics that help ground discussions of AI 
safety and predictability, fairness of AI algorithms, privacy in an era of AI, ethical 
implications of increased automation, and other topics.

    

!43

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

EXPERT FORUM 
By definition, every data set or index loses information and introduces unintended 
biases. Our index can only paint a partial picture of the past, present, and future of AI. 
To broaden this picture, we have collected the perspectives of AI experts spanning 
academia, industry, government and media. 
 

Barbara Grosz 
Harvard 

Mind the Gap 

The first report of the AI Index is laudable not only for its rooting of the state of AI in 
data and the record time in which it was produced, but also for the authors' 
mindfulness about gaps in coverage.  Several missing areas would require, in one way 
or another, metrics that took account not only of the performance of AI methods in a 
vacuum, but also of the quality of an AI technology's interactions with people or of the 
ways in which AI enabled systems affect people, both as individuals and in societies. 
This particular gap is especially noteworthy in light of the recent increased attention 
being given to developing AI capabilities that complement or augment people's 
abilities rather than aiming to replicate human intelligence. IJCAI-16 had "human aware 
AI" as a special theme, AAAI-18 has "human-AI collaboration" as an emerging theme, 
and the last few years have seen many workshops and symposia on human-in-the loop 
AI and on AI and society.  

This gap is reflected in the section on natural language processing, which reports on 
parsing, machine translation and abilities to find answers to questions in a designated 
document, but does not (as it acknowledges) report on dialogue systems or chatbots. 

    

!44

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Parsing requires no consideration of the mental state of the producer of the utterance 
being parsed, and for many situations in which machine translation and question 
answering have been tested it is also possible to ignore mental state and in particular 
the purposes crucial to an utterance's meaning. Not so with dialogue. 

As this AI Index report notes, factors can only be included in an index if there are good 
ways to measure them.  Metrics that take account of the human as well as the AI 
technology pose a major challenge, as anyone who has done research requiring an IRB 
can attest. It is important to take on the challenge of identifying success measures for 
AI algorithms and systems not simply on the basis of their efficiency or completeness, 
but taking into account their impact on the people whose lives they affect.  If this first 
AI Index report spurs development of such metrics, it will have made a major 
contribution to AI, to computer science and to society at large. 

It is important to take on the challenge of identifying 

success measures for AI systems by their impact on 

people's lives. 

 I'd also like to see future AI Index reports investigate not only AI course enrollments, 
but also the numbers of AI courses that devote attention to ethical concerns that AI 
raises.  (Disclosure: For the last three years, I have taught a course on "Intelligent 
Systems: Design and Ethical Challenges".) As AI-enabled systems increasingly pervade 
daily life, AI courses need to convey to students the importance of considering ethics 
from the start of their design. Another challenge for the AI Index then is to find ways 
to track such factors as the number of companies producing AI systems that have 
asked whether such a system should be built, and the numbers of AI systems 
designers who have considered in their design the unintended consequences that 
might ensue from a particular design and how best to ameliorate them. 

    

!45

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Eric Horvitz 
Microsoft 

I’m excited about the publication of the inaugural annual report of the AI Index.  The 
project was spawned by the One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence (AI100) 
at Stanford University, and resonates deeply with the goals of AI100 to host periodic 
studies to assess and address the influences of AI advances on people and society 
over a century.  AI100 was designed to establish a long-lived “connected presence” 
that extends human intellect and agency about AI and its influences into the future. 
 The ambitious AI Index initiative arose in discussions of the AI100 Standing 
Committee in 2015. 

The AI Index defines and tracks sets of metrics about AI advances over time. The first 
report provides data collected about recent trends for key measures of sets of AI 
competencies, AI-related activities, and an exploratory “derivative” measure.  The 
measures show recent upswings on multiple fronts, many based in advances in 
machine learning, and particularly variants of convolutional neural networks, fueled by 
algorithmic advances, as well as the availability of large-scale data resources and 
increasingly powerful computation. 

I find the derivative measures section to be creative and useful, even if they provide 
only coarse signals—and signals that leave room for interpretation.  The AI Vibrancy 
Index attempts to capture the overall “vibrancy” of AI over time, as reflected by a 
combination of measures of AI efforts and ideas in academia and industry. Such 
derivative measures might be validated or calibrated (or refined) in future work by 
aligning them with measures of phenomena that are closer to ground truth of goals, 
such as the statistics collected on the hiring, composition, and compensation of AI 
talent at corporations. 

    

!46

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

The report devotes a special section to a discussion of “human-level” performance, 
and calls out several celebrated results that are relatively easy to define and track. 
These include competencies with performing human-level medical diagnoses (e.g., 
diagnosing pathology from the visual analyses of tissue sections) and winning games 
(e.g., Othello, checkers, chess, go, and poker).  The report also considers human-level 
competencies that are more challenging to define, such as metrics for understanding 
and tracking advances with commonsense reasoning—including the commonsense 
understanding that is displayed by a toddler (out of reach by today’s AI technologies). 

I found the report to be refreshing in its reporting on “what’s missing.”  Beyond the 
expressed gaps, I expect that many people will find additional gaps, blind spots, and 
deficiencies in the definitions and design choices in this first round of the AI Index. 
 However, it is no small feat to move from the initial discussions about an AI index to 
the concrete publication of the current indices. Beyond providing a set of interesting 
findings, putting a reasonable stake in the ground with the publication of these indices 
is a critical step in engaging a wider community in a dialog, aimed at refining and 
extending these metrics. 

Putting a reasonable stake in the ground with the 

publication of these indices is a critical step in 

engaging a wider community in a dialog. 

Over time, we can expect to see numerous studies offering metrics on AI advances. 
These include distinct deep dives (e.g., AAAI 2017) into one or more aspects of the 
status and trends around AI competencies, activities, and influences. I believe that we 
should celebrate multiple analyses and indices about AI; research and studies on AI 
and its influences have been growing within multiple communities and we can expect 
the blossoming of multiple perspectives.  Nonetheless, I see value in working to pull 

    

!47

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

together an increasingly comprehensive index that can serve as a focal point for 
contributions and a “shared lens” for tracking and understanding advances in AI. 

The publication of the first instance of the AI Index provides a set of interesting 
insights about recent trends with AI advances. The commitment to continuing the 
analyses going forward is exciting—and stimulates the imagination about points and 
trend lines that will appear on charts as time extends into the future. 

    

!48

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Kai-Fu Lee 
Sinovation Ventures 

State of AI in China 

The AI Index is an important effort to ground the discussion of AI. There are many 
important statistics in the inaugural report to understand current development of AI, 
primarily for the US market. For now, let me fill the gap by adding this commentary 
about the state of AI in China. 
  
"There's no data like more data."  More data makes AI smarter. So, how much data is 
China generating? 
  
China has the most mobile phones and Internet users in the world, which is about 
three times more than that in the US or India. Many think that the gap between the US 
and China is just a factor of three. It is dramatically larger than that. In China, people 
use their mobile phones to pay for goods, 50 times more often than Americans. Food 
delivery volume in China is 10 times more than that of the US. It took bike-sharing 
company Mobike 10 months to go from nothing to 20 million orders (or rides) per day. 
There are over 20 million bicycle rides transmitting their GPS and other sensor 
information up to the server, creating 20 terabytes of data everyday. Similarly, China’s 
ride-hailing operator Didi is reported to connect its data with traffic control in some 
pilot cities. All of these Internet connected things will yield data that helps make 
existing products and applications more efficient, and enable new applications we 
never thought of. 
  
What about the quality of China's AI products? Many probably still remember the days 
when China was nothing but copycats around 15 years ago. Smart and eager Chinese 
tech giants and entrepreneurs have morphed by western innovations to exceed their 
overseas counterparts. An example in AI, Chinese face recognition startup Face++ 

    

!49

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

recently won first place in 3 computer vision challenges, ahead of teams from Google, 
Microsoft, Facebook, and CMU. 

China's State Council announced a straightforward 

plan to become the AI innovation hub by 2030. 

Chinese government is open-minded with technology development. The environment 
in China is more conducive for fast launch and iteration. In July 2017, China’s State 
Council announced “Next Generation Artificial Intelligence Development Plan” with 
straightforward goal to become a global AI innovation hub by 2030. The plan is 
expected to promote AI as a high priority among major industries and provincial 
governments. If you think this is all talk, China's policies are actually very well 
executed as demonstrated with past plans such as high-speed rail, and the mass 
entrepreneurship and innovation movement. We can expect similar trajectory for its AI 
policies. 
  
The pro-tech, pro experimentation, and pro speed attributes put China in a position to 
become a very strong AI power. In this age of AI, I predict that the United States-China 
duopoly is not only inevitable. It has already arrived. 

    

!50

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Alan Mackworth 
University of British Columbia 

The AI Index, in its Alpha version, is a great start, and already a useful tool for 
measuring AI progress. Most of my comments come in the form of a wish list for 
expanding and restructuring the coverage. Many of the sources for the data I would 
like to see added are hard to come by. But it is important not to fall for the streetlight 
fallacy: looking for the keys under the light rather than where they are likely to be. The 
data that are easy to get may not be the most informative. 

The data that are easy to get may not be the most 

informative. 

The most obvious weakness is how US-centric most of the data is. But the US data is 
the low hanging fruit. Hopefully the international AI community will help by 
crowdsourcing to fill in holes. EU and Canadian statistics may be the next easiest to 
get: for example, enrollment numbers for AI/ML introductory courses. EU funding for 
AI research and startups should be trackable. The data for Asia, China in particular, 
would be very significant; some of it is available. 

Noticing the lack of data source diversity brings to mind the lack of measures of 
geographical and gender diversity of AI researchers and practitioners. 

Under the Volume of Activity heading, along with Academia and Industry, Government 
should be added as a major subheading, with, for example, data on grant funding for AI 
research. Is there a way to measure regulatory activity and governance studies? Those 
activities are certainly ramping up but are they measurable in a meaningful way? 

    

!51

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Consider also adding an NGO category for the burgeoning number of organizations 
like AI2, OpenAI, WEF, and the Turing Institute. 

On the Academia front, it should be possible to get data on a) Talent supply from 
academia e.g. the number of M.Sc./Ph.D. AI/ML theses produced each year. Along with 
the ratio of #AI/#CS theses and b) Talent demand by academia e.g. the number of 
academic positions available that specify AI/ML (perhaps CRA job ads for postdocs 
and faculty). And the ratio of #AI/#CS positions. 

Two very popular indices would be AI salary measures in industry and academia. 
Headhunters, consultants and the CRA could help. Tricky to get reliable data but, at 
the moment, we really only have gossip and anecdotes in NYT stories. 

Putting Published Papers and Conference Attendance under Academia is a 
misclassification since Industry research is strong. Much of the Volume of Activity is 
independent of the Academia/Industry/Government/NGO split and should be lifted 
out. Additional useful measures would include conference paper submissions and AI 
books published/year, e.g. Amazon category. 

In terms of Technical Performance measures, progress on AI solving of Captchas could 
be a good metric. In the list of areas missing for Technological Advances, one 
important missing area not listed is Multi-Agent Systems (MAS). Two MAS activities 
that could be good candidates for metrics are RoboCup, with its 2050 target, and the 
Trading Agent Competitions (TACs). Some would argue that the Turing Test, with the 
Loebner Prize, would be a source of a good metric. It would be worth a brief discussion 
of why that is a good/bad idea. Indeed, some more meta-comments about the criteria 
for including indices would be useful. For those important activities that are (so far) 
hard to quantify, is it worth mentioning them just so that they are not overlooked? 

Finally, how about measures of meta-AI activity? It’s not clear how to quantify it but 
there is clearly an exponential growth of meta-AI institutes, organizations, 
partnerships, think tanks, and indices (like this one) concerned with studying AI itself, 

    

!52

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

measuring AI, forecasting the impact of AI on society, employment, the economy, the 
law, government and the city. Can we quantify and forecast the growth and outcomes 
of meta-AI? Maybe there’s a joke in there somewhere about the meta-AI Singularity? 

    

!53

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Andrew Ng 
Coursera, Stanford 

AI is the new electricity 

AI is the new electricity, and is transforming multiple industries. The AI Index will help 
current generations track and navigate this societal transformation. It will also help 
future generations look back and understand the AI's rise. 

AI is a global phenomenon 

Further, AI is now a global phenomenon, and the AI Index reminds each of us we have 
to look beyond our own borders to understand global progress. The US and China are 
enjoying the greatest investments as well as the most rapid adoption, and Canada and 
UK also making groundbreaking research contributions. Since AI changes the 
foundation of many technology systems – everything ranging from web search, to 
autonomous driving, to customer service chatbots – it also gives many countries an 
opportunity to 'leapfrog" the incumbents in some application areas. Countries with 
more sensible AI policies will advance more rapidly, and those with poorly thought out 
policies will risk being left behind. 

Countries with more sensible AI policies will 

advance more rapidly, and those with poorly 

thought out policies will risk being left behind. 

    

!54

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Deep Learning transformation of AI sub-fields 

Deep Learning first transformed speech recognition, then computer vision. Today, NLP 
and Robotics are also undergoing similar revolutions. The recent improvements in 
speech and vision accuracy have led to a flourishing of applications using speech 
(such as voice controlled speakers) or computer vision (such as autonomous cars). 
Today, NLP's deep learning transformation is well underway; this will lead to a 
flourishing of new applications (such as chatbots). Deep Learning in robotics is also 
gaining significant momentum, and this too will lead to many new applications (such 
as new manufacturing capabilities).  

    

!55

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Daniela Rus 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 

AI, a Vector for Positive Change 

Our world has been changing rapidly. Today, telepresence enables students to meet 
with tutors, and doctors to treat patients thousands of miles away. Robots help with 
packing on factory floors. Networked sensors enable monitoring of facilities, and 3D 
printing creates customized goods. We are surrounded by a world of possibilities. 
These possibilities will only get larger as we start to imagine what we can do with 
advances in artificial intelligence and robotics. 

On a global scale, AI will help us generate better insights into addressing some of our 
biggest challenges: understanding climate change by collecting and analyzing data 
from vast wireless sensor networks that monitor the oceans, the greenhouse climate, 
and the plant condition; improving governance by data-driven decision making; 
eliminating hunger by monitoring, matching and re-routing supply and demand, and 
predicting and responding to natural disasters using cyber-physical sensors.  It will 
help us democratize education through MOOC offerings that are adaptive to student 
progress, and ensure that every child gets access to the skills needed to get a good 
job and build a great life. It may even help those kids turn their childhood dreams into 
reality, as Iron Man stops being a comic book character and becomes a technological 
possibility. 

 AI will help us generate better insights into 

addressing some of our biggest challenges. 

    

!56

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

On a local scale, AI will offer opportunities to make our lives safer, more convenient, 
and more satisfying. That means automated cars that can drive us to and from work, 
or prevent life-threatening accidents when our teenagers are at the wheel. It means 
customized healthcare, built using knowledge gleaned from enormous amounts of 
data. And counter to common knowledge, it means more satisfying jobs, not less, as 
the productivity gains from AI and robotics free us up from monotonous tasks and let 
us focus on the creative, social, and high-end tasks that computers are incapable of. 

All these things –– and so much more! –– become possible when we direct the power 
of computing to problems that humans are not able to solve without support from 
machines. Advances are happening in three different and overlapping fields: robotics, 
machine learning, and artificial intelligence. Robotics puts computing into motion and 
gives machines autonomy. AI adds intelligence, giving machines the ability to reason. 
Machine learning cuts across both robotics and AI, and enables machines to learn, 
improve, and make predictions.  Progress is being made quickly in each of these fields. 
The AI index introduces several metrics to keep track of this progress. The metrics 
provide an important quantitative view on the state of education, research, and 
innovation in the field and provide insight into general trends. 

While AI has the potential to be a vector for incredible positive change, it is important 
to understand what today’s state of the art is: what today’s methods can and cannot 
do. The AI index is defining intelligence tasks and measuring the performance of the 
most advanced AI systems for those tasks. It also provides a framework for education 
in AI and for grand challenges in AI. 

AI can be a vector for incredible positive change; it is 

important to understand what today’s methods can 

and cannot do. 

    

!57

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

The intelligence problem, how the brain produces intelligent behavior and how 
machines can replicate it, remains a profound challenge in science and engineering, 
that requires well trained researchers and sustained long-term research and 
innovation to solve. The AI index is tracking this progress.  

    

!58

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Megan Smith                    Susan Alzner 
3rd CTO of the USA, shift7  

 

     UN Non-Governmental Liaison Service 

AI Index - Accelerate Our Progress on What’s Missing 

The goals outlined for this new annual report are important. Specifically the AI Index 
“...aims to facilitate an informed conversation about AI that is grounded in data” –– to 
share and support emerging context for the urgent multi-party conversation we need 
to be having within and across almost all communities globally.  This team is valiantly 
taking on responsibility to help support collaborative work on filling in voids in context 
and shared visibility that most people globally are experiencing. It notes “...without the 
relevant data for reasoning about the state of AI technology, we are essentially “flying 
blind” in our conversations and decision-making related to AI.” This ‘flying blind’ is 
especially true for people who are not working directly in this field today, particularly 
those who do not have a computer science or other related technical background – 
the vast majority of humanity. 

Diversity and Inclusion are paramount. We are 

missing the humanity due to bias, discriminatory 

cultural patterns, and learned behavior of systemic 

exclusion. 

The report includes a critical open section called “What’s Missing,” acknowledging 
there are many issues still to address (or even begin to consider or prioritize). Among 
these, diversity and inclusion are paramount. We are missing the majority of humanity 
from both the conversation and design teams due to massive conscious and 

    

!59

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

unconscious bias, significant discriminatory cultural patterns, and learned behavior of 
systemic exclusion in almost all communities and in all forms of our media.  The impact 
of these emerging data-enabled AI/ML technologies on all people, and all life globally, 
is already significant, and we will see massive transformation across decades – with 
profound shifts even in the next few years. It is urgent that we rapidly and radically 
improve diversity and inclusion in all dimensions and at all levels in the technology 
sector, in dialogues and amongst decisions makers about technologies, and in 
applications of technology to all sectors.
 
The report shares that “the field of AI is still evolving rapidly and even experts have a 
hard time understanding and tracking progress across the field.” We thank the teams 
and individuals across the world who are stepping up to build useful open forums and 
tools like this nascent index to welcome and engage far more people into a productive 
conversation.  

Here are a few initial selected inputs for consideration:

Future of AI 2016 - White House OSTP

As part of beginning broad engagement on the topic of AI/ML, President Obama 
requested the Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP)  based U.S. CTO team 
to collaboratively champion a series of town hall conversations with other leaders 
including within government including the NSTC; these took place during the summer 
of 2016.  Information about those co-hosted open gatherings and subsequent report 
launched during the White House Frontiers Conference in October 2016, which 
included an AI national track. 

• Preparing for the Future of Artificial Intelligence - workshops and interagency 
working group to learn more about benefits and risks of artificial intelligence. 
May 3 2016 BY ED FELTEN 

• The Administration’s Report on the Future of Artificial Intelligence  - focuses on 
the opportunities, considerations, and challenges of Artificial Intelligence (AI). 
October 12, 2016 BY ED FELTEN AND TERAH LYONS 

    

!60

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Imperative: Broadening Participation and Applications, Training 

Integration of Ethics and Values  

We are in a deeply transformative time – where the Internet is just us, connected – and 
data is being  integrated now more than ever. Change is accelerating with AI/machine 
learning playing a larger role – data science, big data, AI/ML and emergent intelligence 
of communities connected are so significant. How do we avoid bad outcomes, whether 
‘the robot apocalypse’ or massive destructive situations that Stephen Hawking, Elon 
Musk and others are urgently talking about, or just the squandering of the tremendous 
opportunities that AI/ML provides for improving human life (e.g. poverty, equality, 
hunger, justice, counteract bias, etc); we could help solve these challenges if we more 
rapidly broadened the scope of focus topics for AI application and added participation 
from so many more people in these sectors. Either way, we need to integrate our 
shared values into these systems and expand the surface area of creativity engaged as 
soon as possible. Consider this: do we really want to train all of this technology using 
just the data sets that share what we do? We do good things but humanity does some 
pretty bad things too.  This technology gets weaponized just as it gets used for good. 
Today, technology is neither good nor bad, it’s just what gets designed in and what we 
do with it, including unintended applications, bias, and malicious iterations. 

So many more of us have to become much more “woke” about the fact that this shift is 
happening rapidly, scrub ourselves in, have the hard conversations about ethics, and 
move to take action. We need to have discussions about weaponized AI and explore 
controls and other options we can put into place. Let’s try for what we wish could be 
true, let's engage. And even then, Diane Von Furstenberg and Elon talk about us being 
the ‘pets’ for the future AI.  

There are some important documents on these topics - especially United Nations and 
other texts which share globally agreed values, including: 

• 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development & SDGs  

    

!61

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

• Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
• Declaration on Rights of Indigenous Peoples 
• Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action on women’s human rights 
• Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
• International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights 
• IEEE Ethically Aligned Design General Principles - esp Principle 1 on Human 

Benefit lists (p16) 

At MIT’s Commencement June 2017 Tim Cook, CEO of Apple Computer, said: 

“I’m not worried about artificial intelligence giving computers the ability to think like 
humans. I’m more concerned about people thinking like computers without values or 
compassion, without concern for consequences. That is what we need you to help us 
guard against. Because if science is a search in the darkness, then the humanities are 
a candle that shows us where we’ve been and the danger that lies ahead. As Steve 
[Jobs] once said, technology alone is not enough. It is technology married with the 
liberal arts married with the humanities that make our hearts sing. When you keep 
people at the center of what you do, it can have an enormous impact.”  

We need to be broadly aware of leadership work by organizations, associations and 
individuals collaborating to take action - for example: 

• The Algorithmic Justice League (www.ajlunited.org/), which highlights 

algorithmic bias, provides space for people to voice concerns and experiences 
with coded bias, and develops practices for accountability. 

• The petition to the UN urging rapid action on weaponized AI to compel us to 

globally engage asap on this topic. 

• The Computer Science for All Movement (CSforAll - csforallconsortium.org/) for 

tech inclusion in the U.S. and in other countries.  

• The AI4All initiative (ai-4-all.org/), to train a new and more diverse generation of 

future AI technologists, thinkers, and leaders. 

    

!62

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

• Work to capacity-build sectors that are not yet using much AI/ML to advance 
solutions - so that any topic of need might leverage this technology for positive 
impact. 

• Work to add technical people with expertise on these topics into organizations 
that have not traditionally included people with such capability (Including “TQ” 
– tech quotient in the every room – e.g. for governments “TQ in Public Policy” 

The first version of this AI Index launching today is nascent, incomplete, most likely 
naive in ways we don’t even understand yet, and what’s great is it’s a start – using an 
open collaborative approach – on a long journey ahead where we can not see our 
varied future destinations. Recently Cathy O’Neil, author of the book “Weapons of 
Math Destruction,” wrote an op-ed “The Ivory Tower Can’t Keep Ignoring Tech” (New 
York Times Nov 14, 2017) urging academics from all sectors to engage. We agree, and 
also invite and hope everyone, especially youth, will opt-into this conversation –– 
because most importantly, the AI Index includes an invitation to us all.  

The first version of this AI Index is nascent, 

incomplete, most likely naive in ways we don’t even 

understand yet, and what’s great is it’s a start. 

    

!63

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Sebastian Thrun 
Stanford, Udacity

The importance of recent progress in Artificial Intelligence cannot be overstated. The 
field of AI has been around for more than 60 years, and it has had significant impact. 
AI is at the core of Google's search algorithms, Amazon's site design and Netflix's 
movie recommendations. But the advent of powerful computers paired with data set of 
unprecedented scale will be a game changer for society. 

In just the past few years, systems have been developed that rival or even outperform 
highly skilled people. Deep Mind's AlphaGo beats the world's best go players. In our 
own lab, we found that AI systems can diagnose skin cancer in images more accurately 
than some of the best board-certified dermatologists. I have long maintained that the 
Google self-driving car drives better than average drivers like myself. And the team is 
now operating these cars on public roads without the need of a safety driver. And 
Cresta, a start-up company, has shown that AI systems teamed with human specialists 
can double the efficacy of online sales teams. 
  
I believe that in the not-so-distant future, AI will be able to free us from repetitive 
work. AI systems will be able to watch human experts at work, and gradually acquire 
the skills we bring to bear in our daily work. As this happens, more and more repetitive 
work will be done by the machines, freeing us up to pursue more creative work. 

This revolution has a parallel in history. Prior to the invention of the steam engine, 
most of us were farmers. Most people were defined through their physical strength 
and agility (and not the brilliance of their minds), performing highly repetitive work in 
the fields. But machines have turned farmers into super-humans. According to 
FarmersFeedUS.org, one American farmer feeds 155 people. As a result, less than 2% of 
the US population works in agriculture. This has freed up 98% of us to find different 
jobs. About 75% of the US labor force works in offices. We have become lawyers, 

    

!64

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

accountants, doctors, software engineers. Most of our work is highly repetitive. It is 
conceivable that today's AI technology can learn the patterns in our repetitive work, 
and help us do this work faster. Eventually we will all become super-human, aided by 
AI to organize our lives and our understanding of the world. 

Is this good or is this bad? I predict history will look back as a massive advancement of 
humanity. As many of us stopped engaging in repetitive physical labor, we became 
more educated, we became more inventive. With this new revolution, I predict we will 
enter an era of unprecedented human creativity. 

With this new revolution, I predict we will enter an 

era of unprecedented human creativity. 

But it also pushes burdens on people. It has been estimated that one ninth of jobs are 
in jeopardy if self-driving taxis become the dominant method of daily transportation. 
To stay ahead of those changes, we have to become lifelong learners. We have to 
acquire new skill sets and learn to master new technologies. As a society, we need to 
find new ways to help all of us adapt to those changes. 

This report is important. It diligently investigates the recent advances in AI, and 
documents its effect on society. I applaud the authors for putting together such a 
carefully researched report. I hope this report will constructively contribute to the 
much needed public discussion on AI. If we master this challenge, if we are prepared, 
and if we lead, the future will be amazing. For all of us. 

    

!65

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Michael Wooldridge 
Oxford 

The AI Index report makes for fascinating reading, from my perspective as an AI 
researcher, as Head of Department of Computer Science at the University of Oxford, 
and also as someone has served as president of the International Joint Conference on 
AI (http://www.ijcai.org/), and as president of the European Association for AI (http://
www.eurai.org/). The report presents compelling and comprehensive evidence that on 
a range of fronts, AI techniques are making steady progress on core problems that 
have been associated with AI since its earliest days (game playing, machine 
translation, theorem proving, question answering, and so on); in many of these, AI is 
already at or above the accepted level of human expertise. The report also provides 
pretty clear evidence – as if evidence were really needed – that AI is attracting the 
attention of students and industry, with admissions exploding on AI courses, and a 
huge growth in AI startup companies. 

There is, clearly, an AI bubble at present; the question that this report raises for me is 
whether this bubble will burst (cf. the dot com boom of 1996-2001), or gently deflate; 
and when this happens, what will be left behind? My great fear is that we will see 
another AI winter, prompted by disillusion following the massive speculative 
investment that we are witnessing right now. There are plenty of charlatans and snake 
oil salesmen out there, who are quite happy to sell whatever they happen to be doing 
as AI, and it is a source of great personal frustration that the press are happy to give 
airtime to views on AI that I consider to be ill-informed at best, lunatic fringe at worst 
(for a good recent example, see: http://tinyurl.com/y9g74kkr). 

However, while I think some deflation of the current bubble is inevitable within the 
next few years, I think there is cause for hope that it will be a dignified and gentle 
deflation, rather than a spectacular bust. The main reason for this is that, as the AI 
Index clearly demonstrates, AI is delivering on competence. Across a wide spectrum of 

    

!66

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

tasks, AI systems are showing steadily (sometimes rapidly) increasing performance, 
and these capabilities are being deployed with great success in many different 
application areas. To put it another way, I think there is substance underneath the 
current AI bubble, and major companies now understand how to use AI techniques 
productively. Because there is demonstrable substance, and demonstrable (in the 
scientific sense) progress, I don’t believe we will see the backlash associated with the 
AI winter and the end of the expert systems boom. (I look forward to reading the AI 
Index report for 2027, to see how this prediction pans out). 

I think there is substance underneath the current AI 

bubble. 

There is one aspect of AI which is not reflected in the “technical performance” section 
of the AI Index report, and for entirely understandable reasons. That is progress 
towards general AI. The main reason general AI is not captured in the report is that 
neither I nor anyone else would know how to measure progress. The closest in the 
report currently is question answering, which could be understood as demonstrating 
comprehension of a kind, but that is not quite general AI. I don’t think the Turing test is 
an appropriate measure of general AI, however influential and ingenious it is, for 
reasons that will be well-known to an AI audience. So how might we test progress 
towards general AI? This seems particularly important if only to address or dispel fears 
about a sudden possible rise in general AI competence – fears which still seem to 
preoccupy much of the press and presumably many of the lay public. 

    

!67

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

GET INVOLVED! 
We believe initiatives to understand the progress or impact of AI technologies cannot 
succeed without engaging a diverse community. 

No initiative to understand the impact of AI technologies 
can succeed without engaging a diverse community. 

There are many ways, large and small, that you can support the AI Index and we would 
love to get you involved. 

Share Feedback on the AI Index 2017 Report 

We want to hear your perspective on the data in this report, what you feel we are 
missing, and what opportunities you think we should take advantage of when 
collecting about communicating about data related to AI. Feel free to write us a 
thorough review over email or your quick take on Twitter at @indexingai. 

Open Up Your Data 

Reach out to us if you or your organization have the ability to share relevant data. We 
partnered with a large set of organizations to generate this report and strong 
partnerships will continue to be a cornerstone of the AI Index’s operating model going 
forward. 

Provide Domain Knowledge 

Future iterations of the AI Index report will quantify how AI impacts specific verticals, 
such as healthcare, transportation, agriculture etc. We must work with professionals 
across industries to accomplish this. If you or an organization you know of might be a 
resource in tracking the impact of AI in specific areas, please get in touch with us. 

    

!68

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Correct Us 

We want to keep the information we provide as accurate as possible. Still, we collected 
data from a wide variety of sources and may have made mistakes in our aggregation 
process. Let us know if you see any errors and we will update the version of this PDF 
and any information on our website. 

Support Data Collection for the AI Index 

There will always be more data about AI than we can collect and organize. We would 
love to work with you to collect the information that is most important. 

If you know of a useful data source we have missed or a metric we should be tracking, 
send us a quick message to put us on the right track. 

Help Us Go International 

We have already begun working with international partners to collect data that goes 
beyond the United States. If you have relevant international data we would love to hear 
from you. 

Get in Touch! 

Did any of the findings in this report surprise you? Is there something you can’t believe 
we left out? Reach out to us on Twitter @indexingai or contact us at 
feedback@aiindex.org. 

Lastly, to get periodic updates about the AI Index and about the current state of AI, 
please subscribe for email updates at aiindex.org. 

    

!69

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The AI Index is indebted to the One Hundred Year Study on AI at Stanford University 
(AI100), which incubated and provided seed funding for launching the Index. We were 
also graciously supported in various ways by the following individuals at Stanford: 

Tom Abate, Amy Adams, Russ Altman, Tiffany Murray, Andrew Myers. 

We also gratefully acknowledge the additional startup funds provided by Google, 
Microsoft and Bytedance (Toutiao). However, the AI Index is an independent effort and 
does not necessarily reflect the views of these organizations. 

In this startup phase the AI Index has benefitted from the wisdom and advice of its 
advisory committee, whose members include: 

Michael Bowling, Ernie Davis, Julia Hirschberg, Eric Horvitz, Karen Levy, Alan 
Mackworth, Tom Mitchell, Sandy Pentland, Chris Ré, Daniela Rus, Sebastian Thrun, Hal 
Varian, and Toby Walsh. 

We are also indebted to the Expert Forum contributors, some of whom are on our 
advisory committee listed above, whose contributions to this report and to the 
ongoing discussions of the place of AI in society are invaluable: 

Susan Alzner, Barbara Grosz, Eric Horvitz, Kai-Fu Lee, Alan Mackworth, Andrew Ng, 
Daniela Rus, Megan Smith, Sebastian Thrun, Michael Wooldridge. 

We also appreciate the advice and support we received from the following individuals: 

Toby Boyd, Kevin Leyton-Brown, Miles Brundage, AJ Bruno, Jeff Dean, Catherine Dong, 
Peter Eckersley, Stefano Ermon, Oren Etzioni, Carl Germann, Marie Hagman, Laura 
Hegarty, Holger Hoose, Anita Huang, Dan Jurafsky, Kevin Knight, Jure Leskovec, Tim 
Li, Terah Lyons, Mariano Mamertino, Christopher Manning, Gary Marcus, Dewey 

    

!70

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Murdick, Lynne Parker, Daniel Rock, Amy Sandjideh, Skyler Schain, Geoff Sutcliffe, 
Fabian Westerheide, Susan Woodward. 

And the various organizations these individuals represented that provided data for the 
inaugural report: 

Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Crunchbase, Electronic Frontier Foundation, 
Elsevier, EuroMatrix, Google Brain, Indeed.com, Monster.com, Sand Hill Econometrics, 
Sinovation Ventures, TrendKite, VentureSource. 

We thank the following individuals for their help in acquiring conference attendance 
data: 

Chitta Baral, Maria Gini, Carol Hamilton, Kathryn B. Laskey, George Lee, Andrew 
McCallum, Laurent Michel, Mary Ellen Perry, Claude-Guy Quimper, Priscilla Rasmussen, 
Vesna Sabljakovic-Fritz, Terry Sejnowski, Brian Williams, Ramin Zabih. 

And we thank the following individuals for their help in acquiring course enrollment 
data: 

Lance Fortnow, Charles Isbell, Leslie Kaelbling, Steven Lavalle, Dan Klein, Lenny Pitt, 
Mehran Saham, Tuomas Sandholm, Michael-David Sasson, Manuela Veloso, Dan Weld. 

We could not have created this report without the contributions, large and small, of all 
the individuals on this list. We thank them and hope to continue engaging a large 
community as we work to ground conversations about Artificial Intelligence. 

    

!71

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

APPENDIX A: DATA DESCRIPTION & 
COLLECTION METHODOLOGY 
A1. Published Papers 

return to published papers section 

Primary Sources & Data Sets 

Elsevier’s Scopus database of academic publications, which has indexed almost 70 
million documents (69,794,685).  

See more information about Scopus. 

Definition of Collected Data 

The number of academic papers published each year that have been indexed by the 
Scopus catalog in the subject area “Computer Science” and have been indexed with 
the key term “Artificial Intelligence”. For reference: 

• The entire Scopus database contains over 200,000 (200,237) papers in the field 

of Computer Science that have been indexed with the key term “Artificial 
Intelligence”. 
area “Computer Science”. 

• The Scopus database contains almost 5 million (4,868,421) papers in the subject 

Both numbers cited above, as well as the number of total publications in the Scopus 
database, were recorded November 2017. 

Data Collection Process 

We made queries to the Scopus database of published academic papers to count the 
number of AI-related papers, the number of papers in the Computer Science subject 

    

!72

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

area, and the number of papers in the total database. For example, the queries used to 
obtain the count of the relevant papers for the year 2000 are: 

AI query 

title-abs-key(artificial intelligence) 
 
 
 

AND SUBJAREA(COMP) 
AND PUBYEAR AFT 1999  
AND PUBYEAR BEF 2001 

CS query 

SUBJAREA(COMP) 
 
 

AND PUBYEAR AFT 1999  
AND PUBYEAR BEF 2001 

All Scopus query 

PUBYEAR AFT 1999 AND PUBYEAR BEF 2001 

Queries were made for each year from 1996 to 2016. 

Elsevier also provided access to the Scopus API to automate the process of extracting 
data from Scopus. 

For more information about fields in Scopus’ query language, see Scopus Field 
Specification. 
For more information about Elsevier’s APIs, see the Elsevier API documentation. 
For more information about the Scopus search API, see the search API documentation. 

Nuances 

The Scopus system is retroactively updated. As a result, the number of papers the 
Scopus system returns for a given query may increase over time. For example, the 
query “SUBJAREA (COMP) AND PUBYEAR BEF 2000” may return a larger and 
larger number of papers over time as Scopus’ coverage grows more comprehensive. 

    

!73

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Members of the Elsevier team commented that data about papers published after 1995 
would be the most reliable and that their system’s data processing was more 
standardized after this date. For this reason, we only collect data on papers published 
in 1996 or later from the Scopus source. 

Scopus captures a wide range of sources. Their indexing technique and query 
language also makes it easy to identify papers related to a particular topic. Other 
viable sources of data about published papers include Web of Knowledge, Microsoft 
Academic, DBLP, CiteSeerX and Google Scholar. While the total number of papers and 
the specific sources captured differs for each system, we expect that the trend in 
paper publishing growth should remain mostly constant across databases. 

    

!74

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

A2. Course Enrollment 

return to course enrollment section 

Primary Sources & Data Sets 

University enrollment records. Enrollment data was collected from the following 
universities: 

University of California Berkeley, Carnegie Mellon University, Georgia Institute of 
Technology, University of Illinois Urbana Champaign, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Stanford, and University of Washington. 

Definition of Collected Data 

The number of students enrolled in representative undergraduate AI and ML courses 
at a selection of universities for each academic year. The “academic year” begins with 
Fall of that year. 

Collection Process 

We reached out to representatives at each university who facilitated the identification 
of AI & ML courses and the collection of enrollment data from school records. 

Nuances 

Intro AI & ML courses were selected, despite many universities’ additional course 
offerings beyond introductory classes. These courses are more consistent across 
universities and easy to distinguish. 

Many universities had more demand from students to take the introductory AI & ML 
courses than they could support. Our data only represents what universities were able 
to provide. 

    

!75

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Some of the particularly strong upticks and downticks between given years are a 
result of administrative quirks, not student interest. For example, our contact at 
Stanford explained the downtick in ML course enrollment between 2015 and 2016 as 
follows: 

“The ML class is usually only taught once per year.  But in 2015-16 it was taught twice 
(once in Fall and once in Spring).  The Spring quarter offering wasn’t listed until after 
Fall quarter enrollment had already occurred.  So, I’d imagine (based on intuition, not 
hard data) that the Spring offering in 2015-16 siphoned some of the students who 
would have otherwise taken it in Fall 2016-17, leading to a lower enrollment in Fall 
2016-17.  So, really there should be some smoothing going on in the enrollments 
between 2015-16 and 2016-17.  I don’t believe there was actually a real decline in 
interest in the ML course.” 

    

!76

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

A3. Conference Attendance 

return to conference attendance section 

Primary Sources & Data Sets 

The records of organizations that host AI-related conferences. Data was collected for 
the following conferences: 

AAAI, AAMAS, ACL, CP, CVPR, ECAI, ICAPS, ICRA, ICLR, ICML, IJCAI, IROS, KR, NIPS, 
UAI. 

Definition of Collected Data 

The number of attendees present at a selection of academic conferences related to 
artificial intelligence and its subfields. We defined “large conferences” to be those with 
more than 1000 attendees in 2016. “Small conferences” are defined as those with less 
than 1000 attendees in 2016. 

Data Collection Process 

The AI Index team worked with conference organizers and the leaders of sponsoring 
organizations to collect attendance data for each conference. 

Nuances of Data 

Not all conference organizing teams had all attendance data accessible. Many of the 
leadership teams noted that attendance data was missing for some years and some 
could only report approximations. From our review, it seems appropriate to accept the 
estimates provided by the various leadership teams as accurate. 
Not all conferences are run annually, and some conferences have skipped years. 

    

!77

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

A4. AI-Related Startups 

return to AI-related startups section 

Primary Sources & Data Sets 

Crunchbase 
VentureSource, the comprehensive database of venture backed companies 
Sand Hill Econometrics, a provider of indices for venture backed private companies 

Definition of Collected Data 

The number of active startups each year identified as developing or deploying AI 
systems. 

Data Collection Process 

We first collected a list of all organizations with an AI-related category label in 
Crunchbase. To obtain the set of category labels we reviewed the set of all categories 
in Crunchbase and chose a set we felt captured areas of AI technology, listed below. 
We obtained the category labels and the list of organizations through the Crunchbase 
API, provided to us by Crunchbase. 

This list of organizations from Crunchbase was then cross-referenced with the list of 
all venture-backed companies in the VentureSource database. Any venture backed 
companies from the Crunchbase list that were identified in the VentureSource 
database were included. VentureSource also associates keywords with each company. 
Any company with “AI” or “Machine Learning” in the VentureSource keywords was also 
included in the set of relevant startups. 

See more about the Crunchbase API here. 
See a list of Crunchbase Categories here. 

    

!78

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

All interaction with the VentureSource product was conducted by Sand Hill 
Econometrics. 

Nuance 

List of Crunchbase “category” labels used to identify AI companies: 

Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Natural Language Processing, Computer 
Vision, Facial Recognition, Image Recognition, Speech Recognition, Semantic Search, 
Semantic Web, Text Analytics, Virtual Assistant, Visual Search, Predictive Analytics, 
Intelligent System. 

Determining which companies are “AI related” has no simple answer. Our heuristics 
currently favor machine learning technologies. 

    

!79

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

A5. AI-Related Startup Funding  

return to AI-related startup funding section 

Primary Sources & Data Sets 

Crunchbase 
VentureSource, the comprehensive database of venture backed companies 
Sand Hill Econometrics, the premier provider of indices for venture backed private 
companies 

Definition of Collected Data 

The data displayed is the amount of funding invested each year by venture capitalists 
into startups where AI plays an important role in some key function of the business. 

Data Collection Process 

The set of companies for the AI-Related Startups section was used (see description). 
The investment data about this set of companies was then retrieved from 
VentureSource and aggregated to provide yearly funding data. 

All interaction with the VentureSource product was conducted by Sand Hill 
Econometrics. 

    

!80

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

A6. Job Openings 

return to job openings section 

Primary Sources & Data Sets 

Indeed.com 
Monster.com 

Definition of Collected Data 

The Indeed.com data represents the share of jobs in each country that require AI skill, 
normalized to the share percentage in January 2013. 

The Monster.com data represents the absolute number of AI related job openings over 
time, broken down by jobs that require specific skills in AI subfields. Note that the jobs 
in the breakdown may overlap. For example, a job requiring Machine Learning skills 
could also require Natural Language Processing skills. This job would be double 
counted in the breakdown graph. 

Data Collection Process 

We worked with the Indeed and Monster teams directly to obtain this data. Indeed.com 
and Monster used different processes for identifying AI jobs and provided different 
kinds of data about AI job growth data.  

Indeed.com first identified a range of job titles that had AI-related keywords in the 
associated job listing more than 50% of the time. The keywords used:  

Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Natural Language Processing. 

Natural Language Processing was found to be associated with over 90% of job titles 
that had the other AI keywords in the description. Once these job titles were obtained, 
Indeed looked at, for each country, what percentage of total jobs were AI-related in 

    

!81

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

that country. They tracked this percentage over time and returned the data to us, 
normalized starting at the  value in 2013. 

Using data provided by CEB's TalentNeuron tool, Monster identified the number of job 
postings in the U.S. that included "artificial intelligence" as a required skill for 2015, 
2016, and YTD 2017 (through Nov 10). To create the breakdown, the same tool was 
used for skills requiring “artificial intelligence” in addition to another skill keyword like 
“computer vision”. 

    

!82

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

A7. Robot Imports 

return to robot imports section 

Primary Sources & Data Sets 

World Robotics Report, produced annually by the International Federation of Robotics. 

Definition of Collected Data 

The data displayed is the number of industrial robots imported each year into North 
America and Internationally. Industrial robots are defined by the ISO 8373:2012 
standard. 

Data Collection Process 

The International Federation of Robotics’ annual World Robotics Report contains data 
about the volume of robot imports into North America and Internationally. We 
extracted shipment data since the year 2000 from these reports. 

Nuances 

It is unclear how to identify what percentage of robot units run software that would be 
classified as “AI” and it is unclear to what extent AI development contributes to 
industrial robot usage. 

    

!83

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

A8. GitHub Project Statistics 

return to GitHub project statistics section 

Primary Sources & Data Sets 

GitHub Archive 
GitHub Archive on BigQuery 

Definition of Collected Data 

The number of Stars for various GitHub repositories overtime. The repositories 
included: 

apache/incubator-mxnet, BVLC/caffe, caffe2/caffe2, dmlc/mxnet, fchollet/keras, 
Microsoft/CNTK, pytorch/pytorch, scikit-learn/scikit-learn, tensorflow/tensorflow, 
Theano/Theano. 

Collection Process 

GitHub archive data is stored on Google BigQuery. We interfaced with Google 
BigQuery to count the number of “WatchEvents” for each repository of interest. A 
sample of code for collecting the data over the course of 2016 is displayed on the next 
page: 

    

!84

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

project, 
YEAR(star_date) as yearly, 
MONTH(star_date) as monthly, 
SUM(daily_stars) as monthly_stars 

repo.name as project, 
DATE(created_at) as star_date, 
COUNT(*) as daily_stars 

SELECT 
 
 
 
 
FROM ( 
SELECT 
 
 
 
FROM 
 
TABLE_DATE_RANGE( 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WHERE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GROUP BY project, star_date 
) 
GROUP BY project, yearly, monthly 
ORDER BY project, yearly, monthly

repo.name IN ( 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AND type = ‘WatchEvent’ 

[githubarchive:day.], 
TIMESTAMP(“20160101"), 
TIMESTAMP(“20161231")) 

“tensorflow/tensorflow", 
“fchollet/keras", 
“apache/incubator-mxnet", 
“scikit-learn/scikit-learn", 
"caffe2/caffe2", "pytorch/pytorch",  
"Microsoft/CNTK", “Theano/Theano", 
"dmlc/mxnet", "BVLC/caffe") 

    

!85

!
!
 
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

Nuances 

The GitHub Archive currently does not provide a way to count when users remove a 
Star from a repository. Therefore, the data reported slightly over estimates the count 
of Stars. Comparison with the actual number of Stars for the repositories on GitHub 
shows that the numbers are fairly close and the trends remain unchanged. 

There are other ways to retrieve GitHub star data. The star-history tool was used to 
spot-check our results. 

Forks of GitHub project are also interesting to investigate. We found that the trends of 
repository Stars and Forks were almost identical. However, if you are interested in 
looking at the absolute Fork data, you can find the data on our website at aiindex.org, 
or use the BigQuery code above with type=‘ForkEvent’ instead of type=‘WatchEvent’). 

    

!86

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

A9. Sentiment of Media Coverage 

return to sentiment of media coverage section 

Primary Sources & Data Sets 

TrendKite 

Definition of Collected Data 

The TrendKite service indexes general media articles and they employ a sentiment 
analysis classifier that categorizes articles as “positive”, “negative”, or “neutral”. We 
display the percentage of articles categorized as positive and negative (the remaining 
articles are neutral). 

Collection Process 

We used the below query to identify AI articles. We adjusted it to remove a source that 
introduced a disproportionate amount of irrelevant articles with negative sentiment. 

Query 

”Artificial Intelligence” 
AND NOT “MarketIntelligenceCenter.com’s" 

NOT site_urls_ll:( 
 
 

“individual.com" 
OR "MarketIntelligenceCenter.com") 

TrendKite picks up articles from many sources, but provides filters to make searches 
more relevant. We employed filters that: 

• Only included English-language articles 
• Removed press releases 
• Removed financial news 
• Removed obituaries 

    

!87

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

With this data we intend to share the general public interest in AI and coverage of AI 
for the general public. This filters helped us simplify the space that our signal is drawn 
from. 

    

!88

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

A10. Object Detection 
return to object detection section 

Primary Sources & Data Sets 

LSVRC ImageNet Competition 2010 - 2017 
ImageNet Data Set 

Definition of Collected Data 

The accuracy of the winning teams in the object detection challenges for the LSVRC 
ImageNet competition since 2010. See definition of metrics on the LSVRC website. 

Data Collection Process 

We collected the competition data from the leaderboards for each LSVRC competition 
hosted on the ImageNet website. 

Nuances 

The ImageNet competition is finished as of 2017. It may be possible to continue 
surveying the literature for new state of the art results on ILSVRC test sets, but it is 
likely that new benchmarks may need to be identified and tracked. 

The estimate of human-level performance is from Russakovsky et al, 2015. 

    

!89

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

A11. Vision Question Answering 

return to visual question answering section 

Primary Sources & Data Sets 

Arxiv (For literature review)  
VQA Data Set 

The VQA data set consists of images, questions about the content of those images, 
and 10 human-generated answers to those questions. 

Definition of Collected Data 

The data collected represents the accuracy of each AI system to produce open-ended 
answers to questions about images (in contrast to producing answers to multiple 
choice questions about images). 

Accuracy is defined as in the original VQA paper. We collect the accuracies reported in 
academic papers when state-of-the-art results were achieved. 

Data Collection Process 

We performed a literature review to identify when papers achieved new state-of-the-
art results on the VQA 1.0 data set between 2016 and 2017. 

Nuances of Data 

In conducting our literature review it is quite possible that we missed results which 
would slightly alter the timeline of new state-of-the-art achievements. Ensembles were 
considered, not just single models. 

With ImageNet closing as a competition driving progress in vision tasks, we decided to 
survey the landscape of progress in the Visual Question Answering domain. It seems 

    

!90

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

there may not be an “ImageNet” replacement in the near future however, and we may 
need to continue measuring punctuated progress, as we have done with VQA, until a 
more dominant benchmark arises. 

VQA 1.0 was retired shortly after it’s release in favor of VQA 2.0 which, among other 
things, adds more data in an attempt to debias aspects of the data set. 

    

!91

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

A12. Parsing 

return to parsing section 

Primary Sources & Data Sets 

Penn Treebank 

The Wall Street Journal portion of the Penn Treebank is a data set of sentences 
annotated with a constituency-based parse tree for each sentence. Section 23 of this 
data set has become the primary test set for research into automatic parsers. 

Definition of Collected Data 

Automatic parsers are evaluated by comparing the constituents of automatically 
generated parses to the constituents in gold parses from a test set. The precision and 
recall of the generated constituents are combined and reported as the F1 score. We 
report is the F1 score of parsers on sentences in section 23 of the WSJ portion of the 
Penn Treebank. We report these scores for sentences of length <40 words and on the 
entire set of sentences where each are available. Learn more about Constituency-
based parse trees on the wikipedia page for parse trees. 

Data Collection Process 

We conducted a literature review to identify when new parsers increased the state of 
the art in automatic parsing. We collected the F1 scores of parsers we identified going 
back to 1995. Ensembles were included, not just single models. 

Nuances of Data 

In the early days of automatic parsing research, parsers were typically evaluated only 
on sentences of length <40 words and length <100 words for computational and 
methodological reason. We have recorded the F1 scores of systems on sentences of 
length <40 words and on all sentences in the corpus when available. 

    

!92

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

A13. Machine Translation 

return to machine translation section 

Primary Sources & Data Sets 

Conference / Workshop on Machine Translation (WMT) news translation task 
EuroMatrix 

There is an annual Conference on Machine Translation, which spun out of an annual 
Workshop on Machine Translation. Each year WMT hosts a news translation task and 
provides new training and test data sets. Teams of attendees submit the translation 
systems they have built to participate in the translation task. 

Definition of Collected Data 

The main metric used by WMT aims at ranking the competing entries and does not 
allow year-over-year comparisons.  It is also very labor intensive.  We have fallen back 
on BLEU, an automatic method that does a rough comparison of the system 
translation to a number of human-generated translations.  It is a modified version of 
precision, between 0 and 1, where higher is better. One can also calculate the average 
BLEU score of a machine translation system on a corpus of translation pairs. For each 
year, we have recorded the highest average BLEU score achieved by a system 
submitted to that year’s news translation task for English to German and German to 
English. See below for the nuances of the WMT translation task and the BLEU metric. 

Data Collection Process 

EuroMatrix has recorded the BLEU scores of submissions to the news translation task 
since 2006 on the English to German and German to English language pairs. We 
selected the BLEU score of a top performing system each year, specifically using BLEU 
(11b), which defines a protocol for tokenizing sentences. When possible, we selected 

    

!93

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

the score of a system that had a high-ranking BLEU score in both pairs as the 
representative for that year. 

See the implementation of 11b tokenization in the linked file. 

Nuances of the Data 

BLEU can be computed automatically and it has been shown to correlate with human 
judgement of translation quality. However, the metric cannot be used across corpuses 
and it can misleading to compare BLEU scores between systems. While the graphs 
trends upward generally, we can see one way this metric is flawed in 2017, when the 
BLEU scores fell significantly compared to the 2016 scores (though, the 2017 scores 
are still higher than the 2015 scores). It is unlikely that the performance of MT systems 
declined compared to 2016, but the evaluation scheme presented here is not perfect. 

However, looking at trends over larger time periods, the BLEU score can give an 
indication of progress in the area of machine translation. 

    

!94

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

A14. Question Answering 

return to question answering section 

Primary Sources & Data Sets 

Stanford Question Answering Dataset 

The Stanford Question Answering Dataset (SQuAD) is a data set of over 500 articles 
and 100,000 question-answer pairs associated with the articles. Given a question 
about the content of an article, the task is to identify the answer within the article. 

Definition of Collected Data 

The chosen evaluation metric on this data set is “Exact Match” (EM), the percentage 
of answers generated by a system that exactly match the answer in the test set. The 
data displayed is the state-of-the-art EM score of question-answering systems on the 
SQuAD data set over time. 

Data Collection Process 

We collected the results from the leaderboard hosted at the SQuAD website. 

Nuances of Data 

All answers in the SQuAD data set are direct quotes from the associated article. 
Therefore, the job of the system is really to identify what subsection of the given 
article contains the answer to the posed question. 

While easy to track, it is not clear how long the SQuAD data set will be of interest. 
Scores for the task have risen rapidly since SQuAD’s introduction in June 2016. 
The Exact Match score of humans on this data set is reported to be 82.304. 

    

!95

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

A15. Speech Recognition 

return to speech recognition section 

Primary Sources & Data Sets 

Switchboard Hub5’00 data set (Speech and Transcripts). 
EFF AI Progress Metrics 

Definition of Collected Data 

The state-of-the-art Word Error Rate (WER) of trained speech recognition systems on 
the standard Switchboard Hub5’00 data set over time. WER is the number of errors -- 
word substitutions, deletions and insertions-- needed to map the transcription to the 
gold standard, normalized by the length of the sentence.  We plot Word Accuracy, or 1 - 
WER to keep the direction of progress consistent across graphs. 

Data Collection Process 

The Electronic Frontier Foundation previously performed a literature review to extract 
performance of speech recognition systems on the HUB5’00 data set. We simply 
display these results in our report. 

Nuances of Data 

The Switchboard data set has been in use for a long time. There is concern that our AI 
systems may be significantly overfit to this specific data and that further progress on 
this data set may be less indicative of overall progress in the field going forward. 

There has recently been some disagreement about what the human performance for 
WER on the Switchboard HUB5’00 data set actually is. There have been reports of 5.1% 
and 5.9%, and even reports of below 5%. In this report we choose to use the 5.1% 
measure as the bar for human performance. 

    

!96

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

A16. Theorem Proving 

return to theorem proving section 

Primary Sources & Data Sets 

Thousands of Problems for Theorem Provers (TPTP) 

TPTP is a large set of Theorem Proving problem instances. 

Definition of Collected Data 

The Automatic Theorem Proving (ATP) community has developed a method for 
determining how “difficult” a given problem instance is to solve with current ATP 
technology. We record the average difficulty of a subset of TPTP problems over time. 
The chosen TPTP problems are those which have not been updated since TPTP v5.0.0 
(year 2010). We graph 1 - Difficulty and title this “Tractability” to maintain a consistent 
direction of progress across graphs. 

See the definition of TPTP problem difficulty in a paper by the TPTP maintainer. 
See a visual example of how the difficulty of a given TPTP problem instance is 
calculated. 

Data Collection Process 

The TPTP data set includes the difficulty of each problem at each version. We wrote 
scripts to extract these difficulties from the desired subset of TPTP problem instances 
and to compute the average difficulties the relevant problems problems over time. The 
scripts will be made available on the AI Index website at aiindex.org. 

Nuances of Data 

The definition of TPTP problem difficulty used by the community has some quirks. It is 
dependent on the set of available ATP systems. It is possible for a problem to become 

    

!97

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

more difficult over time if many useful ATP systems are created that cannot solve the 
problem. 

See a review of the TPTP v6.4.0 data set by its maintainer. 

    

!98

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

A17. SAT Solving 

return to SAT Solving section 

Primary Sources & Data Sets 

SAT Competition 
SAT Solver Performance Data 

The SAT competition has an “industrial” track for problem instances that take the form 
of practical problems. Holger Hoos and Kevin Leyton-Brown took 69 solvers and 1076 
problem instances that have been a part of the competition since 2007 and ran each 
solver on each problem on the same hardware. 

Definition of Collected Data 

For each year, we take the average of the percentage of problems (all problems in the 
competition since 2007) completed by solvers submitted that year as well as the 
percentage of problems solved by the best solver. 

Collection Process 

Hoos & Leyton-Brown collected the performance of each solver on each problem. We 
simply aggregated the data to produce the score described above. 

Nuances 

This metric will improve simply with processor speed, although Hoos and Leyton-
Brown have corrected for this by running everything on the same hardware.  

While this metric essentially tracks how efficient SAT solvers are becoming over time, 
this metric does not quantify the novelty of contributions of new SAT solvers over 
time. In other words, it may be possible for this metric to mostly represent engineering 
feats (which are still important) as opposed to algorithmic breakthrough. We are 

    

!99

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

reviewing methodologies that may better quantify the fundamental contribution of 
newly created SAT solvers. 

    

!100

!
!
AI INDEX, NOVEMBER 2017

 

    

!101

!
!
