4/13/2018

AI 100 - Executive Summary | One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence (AI100) | Evernote Web

AI 100 - Executive Summary | One Hundred Year Study
on Artificial Intelligence (AI100)
Executive Summary

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a science and a set of computational technologies that are inspired by—but typically operate
quite differently from—the ways people use their nervous systems and bodies to sense, learn, reason, and take action.
While the rate of progress in AI has been patchy and unpredictable, there have been significant advances since the
field's inception sixty years ago. Once a mostly academic area of study, twenty-first century AI enables a constellation
of mainstream technologies that are having a substantial impact on everyday lives. Computer vision and AI planning,
for example, drive the video games that are now a bigger entertainment industry than Hollywood. Deep learning, a form
of machine learning based on layered representations of variables referred to as neural networks, has made speech-
understanding practical on our phones and in our kitchens, and its algorithms can be applied widely to an array of
applications that rely on pattern recognition. Natural Language Processing (NLP) and knowledge representation and
reasoning have enabled a machine to beat the Jeopardy champion and are bringing new power to Web searches.

While impressive, these technologies are highly tailored to particular tasks. Each application typically requires years of
specialized research and careful, unique construction. In similarly targeted applications, substantial increases in the
future uses of AI technologies, including more self-driving cars, healthcare diagnostics and targeted treatments, and
physical assistance for elder care can be expected. AI and robotics will also be applied across the globe in industries
struggling to attract younger workers, such as agriculture, food processing, fulfillment centers, and factories. They will
facilitate delivery of online purchases through flying drones, self-driving trucks, or robots that can get up the stairs to the
front door.

This report is the first in a series to be issued at regular intervals as a part of the One Hundred Year Study on Artificial
Intelligence (AI100). Starting from a charge given by the AI100 Standing Committee to consider the likely influences of
AI in a typical North American city by the year 2030, the 2015 Study Panel, comprising experts in AI and other relevant
areas focused their attention on eight domains they considered most salient: transportation; service robots; healthcare;
education; low-resource communities; public safety and security; employment and workplace; and entertainment. In
each of these domains, the report both reflects on progress in the past fifteen years and anticipates developments in
the coming fifteen years. Though drawing from a common source of research, each domain reflects different AI
influences and challenges, such as the difficulty of creating safe and reliable hardware (transportation and service
robots), the difficulty of smoothly interacting with human experts (healthcare and education), the challenge of gaining
public trust (low-resource communities and public safety and security), the challenge of overcoming fears of
marginalizing humans (employment and workplace), and the social and societal risk of diminishing interpersonal
interactions (entertainment). The report begins with a reflection on what constitutes Artificial Intelligence, and concludes
with recommendations concerning AI-related policy. These recommendations include accruing technical expertise
about AI in government and devoting more resources—and removing impediments—to research on the fairness,
security, privacy, and societal impacts of AI systems.

Contrary to the more fantastic predictions for AI in the popular press, the Study Panel found no cause for concern that
AI is an imminent threat to humankind. No machines with self-sustaining long-term goals and intent have been
developed, nor are they likely to be developed in the near future. Instead, increasingly useful applications of AI, with
potentially profound positive impacts on our society and economy are likely to emerge between now and 2030, the
period this report considers. At the same time, many of these developments will spur disruptions in how human labor is
augmented or replaced by AI, creating new challenges for the economy and society more broadly. Application design
and policy decisions made in the near term are likely to have long-lasting influences on the nature and directions of
https://www.evernote.com/Home.action?login=true#n=3c062726-859d-49bf-a953-b978112360f7&s=s352&b=dc2c8a2d-808a-46f2-aed6-44c729a5d577&ses=4&sh=1&

AI 100 - Executive Summary | One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence (AI100) | Evernote Web

4/13/2018
and policy decisions made in the near term are likely to have long lasting influences on the nature and directions of
such developments, making it important for AI researchers, developers, social scientists, and policymakers to balance
the imperative to innovate with mechanisms to ensure that AI's economic and social benefits are broadly shared across
society. If society approaches these technologies primarily with fear and suspicion, missteps that slow AI's development
or drive it underground will result, impeding important work on ensuring the safety and reliability of AI technologies. On
the other hand, if society approaches AI with a more open mind, the technologies emerging from the field could
profoundly transform society for the better in the coming decades.

Study Panel: 

Peter Stone, Chair, University of Texas at Austin 
Rodney Brooks, Rethink Robotics 
Erik Brynjolfsson, Massachussets Institute of Technology 
Ryan Calo, University of Washington 
Oren Etzioni, Allen Institute for AI 
Greg Hager, Johns Hopkins University 
Julia Hirschberg, Columbia University 
Shivaram Kalyanakrishnan, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay 
Ece Kamar, Microsoft Research 
Sarit Kraus, Bar Ilan University 
Kevin Leyton-Brown, University of British Columbia 
David Parkes, Harvard University 
William Press, University of Texas at Austin 
AnnaLee (Anno) Saxenian, University of California, Berkeley 
Julie Shah, Massachussets Institute of Technology 
Milind Tambe, University of Southern California 
Astro Teller, X

Cite This Report
Peter Stone, Rodney Brooks, Erik Brynjolfsson, Ryan Calo, Oren Etzioni, Greg Hager, Julia Hirschberg, Shivaram
Kalyanakrishnan, Ece Kamar, Sarit Kraus, Kevin Leyton-Brown, David Parkes, William Press, AnnaLee Saxenian, Julie
Shah, Milind Tambe, and Astro Teller.  "Artificial Intelligence and Life in 2030." One Hundred Year Study on Artificial
Intelligence: Report of the 2015-2016 Study Panel, Stanford University, Stanford, CA,  September
2016. Doc: http://ai100.stanford.edu/2016-report. Accessed:  September 6, 2016.

Report Authors
AI100 Standing Committee and Study Panel 

Copyright
© 2016 by Stanford University. Artificial Intelligence and Life in 2030 is made available under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 License (International): https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/4.0/.

https://www.evernote.com/Home.action?login=true#n=3c062726-859d-49bf-a953-b978112360f7&s=s352&b=dc2c8a2d-808a-46f2-aed6-44c729a5d577&ses=4&sh=1&

4/13/2018

AI 100 - Executive Summary | One Hundred Year Study on Artificial Intelligence (AI100) | Evernote Web

https://www.evernote.com/Home.action?login=true#n=3c062726-859d-49bf-a953-b978112360f7&s=s352&b=dc2c8a2d-808a-46f2-aed6-44c729a5d577&ses=4&sh=1&

