Natural Language Processing – Business 
Applications 

Last updated on June 28, 2018 by Marco Lagi 

Executives worry about their businesses. 

They often have to navigate, with limited resources, a stormy market made of customers, 
competitors, and regulators, and the interactions between all these actors make finding answers 
to business questions a complex process. 

But recently, machines have demonstrated their abilities to help shine some light on this chaos 
and provide, if not direct answers, context clues that help guide executives in using AI to to 
handle business problems. 

In this article, we delve into examples of how natural language processing (NLP) business 
applications can be applied at scale to address 5 pressing business questions. 

 

Five NLP Business Applications 
1 – Customer service: “How can I keep my customers 
happy?” 
NLP is used by computers to manipulate human language, whether  to extract meaning, generate 
text, or for any other purpose. The interaction computer-language is categorized according to the 
task that needs to be accomplished: summarizing a long document, translating between two 
human languages, or detecting spam email are all examples of tasks that today can be decently 
accomplished by a machine. 

While this wasn’t the case 30 years ago, most of NLP today is based on machine learning i.e. 
statistical methods that are able to simulate what a human would do in similar circumstances. 

NLP is heavily used in customer service. The interactions between customers and companies 
contain a lot of useful breadcrumbs that point towards the reasons for customer dissatisfaction, 
and the interaction itself can be cause of discontent. 

In order to keep a finger on the pulse of consumers’ intent, many companies now transcribe and 
analyze customer call recordings. They also deploy chat bots and automated online assistants to 
provide an immediate response to simple needs and decrease the load for customer service reps. 
Relevant NLP tasks include: 

•  Speech recognition, which converts spoken language into text. Advances in deep learning 
over the last 10 years have allowed major players to deploy this technology in commercial 
systems like Siri, Google Now, Skype’s translator etc. with good performances. 

•  Question answering, which involves exactly that—answering questions posed by humans in 

a natural language. When in 2011 IBM’s Watson outclassed the two best humans at 
Jeopardy!, Ken Jennings wrote on his video screen: “I, for one, welcome our new computer 
overlords.” The task was especially hard for the machine, since the game is renowned for its 
convoluted and often opaque questions about general knowledge. Similar technology is 
used today by many companies for chatbots, both for internal (HR, operations) and external 
(customer service, IoT) projects. 

 

2 – Reputation monitoring: “What are people saying about 
me?”  
In the 1980s, companies started using software to find patterns in their own data and make 
better decisions. Optimization of supply chains, inventories and warehouses, sales processes and 
many other applications gave rise to what we now call business intelligence. But what’s inside a 
company’s walls is not nearly as much (or as valuable) as what’s outside of them. 

As the cost of computation kept dropping and algorithms kept improving, businesses started 
adopting tools that allowed them to look beyond their databases. This kind of data is commonly 
referred to as external data, public data, or open-source intelligence (OSINT). 

While some of this data is structured and ready to be analyzed (e.g. census data, stock prices), 
most of its value remains tapped in unstructured, human-generated text such as news; blog 
posts; forums; patents; job postings; reports; SEC filings; social media; company websites; etc. 
These sources contain a plethora of precious information about how competitors, customers and 
the market as a whole are evolving. 

An example of how this kind of data can be used is reputation monitoring. It’s no secret that most 
customers check reviews online before buying a product, whether it’s a phone or a falafel. 
According to the most recent BrightLocal survey, 92 percent of customers read online reviews 
and 86 percent won’t buy a product with fewer than 3 out of 5 stars. 

And as consumers have started voicing their complaints on Twitter and Facebook, reputation 
monitoring and management has become a top priority for businesses. Companies can now scan 
the entire web for mentions of their brand and products and recognize cases when they should 
take action. 

Relevant NLP tasks for this application include: 

•  Sentiment analysis, which determines the attitude, emotional state, judgment or intent of 

the writer. This is done by either assigning a polarity to the text (positive, neutral or 
negative) or trying to recognize the underlying mood (happy, sad, calm, angry…). What 
about the times when multiple attitudes need to be accounted for in the same sentence? 
For example, “The pizza was amazing, but the waiter was awful!” 

In the case above, the text is split into clauses, and polarity and mood are assessed for each. So, 
the previous text becomes something like: 

{“clause”: “The pizza was amazing”, 
“polarity”: 0.92, 
“mood”: “happy”}, 

{“clause”: “but the waiter was awful!”, 
“polarity”: -0.95, 
“mood”: “angry”} 

•  Coreference resolution, which connects pronouns to the right objects. This is a hard task, 
but it’s essential to interpret the text correctly. For example, if a customer writes: “A guy 
from the dealer called to ask if I liked my new car. Well, no man, it sucks?”, it’s important to 
recognize that “it” refers to the car and not the guy. The customer is complaining about the 
product, not the service. As Elon Musk says, “Brand is just a perception”. Right now, your 
customers are talking about you, influencing the way other consumers perceive your brand. 
NLP can help you stay on top of your in-the-trenches reputation. 

 

3 – Ad placement: “Who is interested in my product?”  
Media buying is usually the largest line in a company’s advertising budget, so any targeting that 
can be done to ensure that ads are presented to the right eyeballs is of paramount importance. 
While in the past marketers have focused on demographics (race, economic status, sex, age, etc.) 
and psychographics (values, personality, attitudes, opinions, etc.), they’ve quickly adapted to the 
new digital area. 

Our emails, social media, e-commerce and browsing behaviors contain a lot of information about 
what we’re really interested in. The huge potential of this kind of unstructured data is confirmed 
by the fact that 2 of the 10 largest companies today generate most of their revenue selling ads 
(Google and Facebook). Relevant NLP tasks for this application include: 

•  Keyword matching, which checks whether words of interest are included in some text. This 

is one of the easiest tasks in NLP, and at the same time one of the most remunerative. While 
this first approximation is often good enough, its lack of sophistication can produce pretty 
inappropriate results. 

•  Sense disambiguation, or identification of which sense of a word is used in a sentence. While 

the human brain is pretty good at this task, a computer won’t necessarily find it easy to 
recognize that the term pounds in the sentence, “I gained 20 pounds since the 
wedding!”,  most likely refers to the unit of mass rather than the currency. This is still an 
open problem in NLP. 

 

4 – Market intelligence: “What’s happening with my 
competitors?” 
Markets are influenced by information exchange – between company/shareholders, 
government/citizens or simply individuals. Knowing the status of an industry is essential to 

developing an effective strategy, but the channels of content distribution today (RSS feeds, social 
media, emails) produce so much information that it’s becoming hard to keep up. 

This is especially true in financial markets, which is why hedge funds routinely use NLP to improve 
their models. Relevant NLP tasks for this application include: 

•  Event extraction, which recognizes what’s happening to an entity. M&As, employment 

changes, deal closings and everything else that happens to organizations or people can be 
extracted automatically. For example, “Howard Schultz Stepping Down As Starbucks CEO” 
can be parsed as: 

{“company”: “Starbucks”, 
“position”: “CEO”, 
“person”: “Howard Schultz”, 
“event”: “end of employment”} 

A structured database of events about companies, governments and people is an extremely 
powerful tool for analyzing the business ecosystem. 

•  Sentence classification, or putting a sentence in a predefined set of buckets. This is often 

used as a first pass to extract relevant content from large repositories, like the SEC’s EDGAR 
system. For example, “We expect a 15% increase in revenue next year,” can be classified as 
a forward-looking statement. 

 

5 – Regulatory compliance: “Is my product a liability?” 
A crucial example of compliance is pharmacovigilance i.e. the studies done after a drug has been 
marketed (phase IV of clinical trials) to gather information on its side effects. A lot of information 
about adverse drug events (ADEs) resides in what’s called unstructured clinical narratives, or 
patients’ reports about their health. 

Pharma companies extract ADEs from 1) electronic health records (EHRs), social media and 
forums for patients complaining about a problem, and 2) web search trends and patterns for 
patients looking for a solution. Relevant NLP tasks for this application include: 

•  Named entity recognition (NER), which extracts the names of drugs, diseases, patients, and 
pharma companies using rule-based or statistical methods. Applying NER to a sentence will 
be able to convert it from, “Valium makes me sleepy,” to “{drug} makes me {symptom}.” 

•  Relation detection, used to identify the context in which the ADE is mentioned. This is often 
done with frames, or patterns of words that correspond to a concept, e.g. “I felt {symptom} 
after taking {drug}” is a pattern that matches the presence of side effects. 

By applying these two tasks consecutively, we’ve identified that the patient is linking the drug 
Valium to the side effect sleepy. Both these tasks benefit from using ontologies i.e. structured 
domain knowledge (in this case biomedical) that provides the object dictionary and the relations 
between objects. 

What’s next in AI for BI 

Over the last 10 years, companies have been able to carve the most promising NLP business 
applications out of academic research, and use them to improve their business intelligence. The 
NLP market size, which is about $7.5B today, is estimated to grow to $16B by 2021. 

Still, computers are not able to process or understand text like humans do, at least not yet. 

As mentioned before, most of the methods employed in NLP are statistical in nature, and 
statistics can only go so far without context or semantics. The algorithms behind the applications 
described above simulate human understanding and can do that at scale, but they are still brittle 
in that they can’t simulate a behavior they haven’t seen before. 

For example, every time Siri tries to answer a question that has not been programmed to 
respond, it fails miserably, and it will keep failing until Apple’s engineers implement the fix. 

The future of this field is about moving from NLP to natural language understanding (NLU), where 
a deeper connection between the concepts communicated and facts about the world is 
established. In artificial intelligence, this is considered an AI-hard problem: to be solved, 
computers have to be as intelligent as people. 

But while the future is still in the works, present NLP technologies  can still provide businesses 
with useful answers to bounded questions 

 

