How to Conduct and Leverage an Expertise Audit 

How to Conduct and Leverage an 
Expertise Audit 
 
By Patrick Lambe 
 
 
 
 
Expertise audits are most useful when: 

•  Your organization is dependent on specialised expertise and/or experience 
•  That expertise or experience is in short supply or difficult to acquire 
•  You run a risk of losing key expertise/experience eg through retirement, 

staff turnover, or job rotation 

 
In small organizations or within individual workgroups, it is fairly easy to identify 
where your expertise and experience lies, and also to identify any risks of loss 
you might be vulnerable to. However, large organizations are probably using 
expertise and experience in many different pockets of activity, and if you want to 
put in place a managed programme for protecting or developing experience and 
expertise, you will need to conduct a systematic audit so that you can: 

a.  Prioritise your interventions according to the importance of the expertise 

and the risk of loss 

b.  Keep track of your expertise and experience base over time 
c.  Keep track of your expertise and experience needs over time. 

 
This guide is in three parts: 

1.  Understanding Expertise – where we look at what constitutes expertise 

and experience and why they are worth managing carefully 

2.  Conducting an Expertise Audit – where we look at techniques and 

information sources for locating and prioritising critical expertise in your 
organisation 

3.  Leveraging an Expertise Audit – where we look at different strategies 

for protecting or growing critical expertise. 

 
 
 
1. Understanding Expertise 
 
Expertise can be made up of any combination of four primary ingredients: 
 
Technical knowledge which is hard to acquire and requires extensive 
experience to gain a good understanding of. To some extent it can be written 
down and can be acquired through study, but experts will usually require practice 
and experience over time to really master the technical knowledge. Once 
mastered, they may have the capacity to communicate, teach, write and even 
create new technical knowledge in their domain. The technical knowledge part of 
expertise does therefore have a strong explicit element combined with tacit 
elements, and documentation can help to transfer a part of it, so long as the 
opportunity to build experience over time is also provided. 
 
Skills which are hard to acquire and require extensive practice over time to 
perfect. Many skills can be trained, but the skills of experts cannot be acquired 
just through training. Like technical knowledge, the skills of experts are 
developed and deepened through a combination of training and practice. Unlike 

© 2007 Straits Knowledge  

  

www.straitsknowledge.com 

1 

How to Conduct and Leverage an Expertise Audit 

technical knowledge, very often the skills cannot be made explicit, but need to be 
communicated through a mixture of training, demonstration, coaching and 
practice. Documentation has very little value in transferring the skills part of 
expertise. 
 
Experience which is continued practice over time, building up a series of 
patterns of different ways in which work can be done. This “pattern” base is 
constantly referred to in the mind of the expert, helping the expert recognize 
previous experiences that may be relevant to the present situation. The mark of 
experience is that the expert can immediately recognize the salient and important 
features of a new situation, where a novice will try to focus on everything and will 
miss signals that may be critical.  
 
The expert can “see” the important aspects of a situation very quickly, and using 
their extensive memory patterns can run mental simulations about what is likely 
or not likely to result from different courses of action. In other words, their 
experience gives them a repertoire of mental models about how the world works, 
and by running these mental simulations, experts can form accurate expectations 
about what might occur and improvise appropriate responses.  
 
Experience underpins all the other elements of expertise, including skills and 
technical knowledge. The expert’s repertoire of patterns incorporates new 
technical knowledge and allows them to apply their skills in greater depth and 
with greater effect.  
 
Experience is largely tacit, and is very difficult to transfer through documentation, 
because it is built up through lived experiences and practice. However certain 
forms of knowledge transfer can accelerate the acquisition of experience. For 
example, the “seeing” aspects of expertise can be transferred by observation and 
coaching, where an expert can point out to a novice what needs to be considered 
in a given situation, and help them see the salient features. This is a technique 
used in military training and in simulations. Storytelling is another possible 
strategy, because stories are descriptions of lived experience where the context, 
the observations and the way events unfolded can all be communicated without 
the listener having to live through the experience themselves. 
 
Routines which have been learned and improvised as heuristics or “tricks of the 
trade” over time. Experts can use their ability to “read” situations and to run 
mental simulations to develop short cuts or heuristics which they can use again 
and again in similar situations. This enables them to react very quickly to 
challenging situations without having to think through a response every time. 
These routines are developed by leveraging their tacit knowledge, but once they 
have been developed they can quite often be documented as recipes, methods or 
templates, and transferred in explicit form to less experienced staff. Usually the 
main difficulty with routines is that experts are often only semi-aware of the 
heuristics and routines they have developed, and so they may not be visible to 
colleagues either. 
 
Notice that all expertise is by its nature difficult to gain, and takes time and 
experience to mature. 
 
While it’s often relatively easy to pinpoint who your experts are, the ingredients 
of their expertise (and hence the transferability of that expertise) might not be 
very obvious. Not all the aspects of somebody’s expertise might be visible. It may 
not be possible to document or even describe all the elements of an expert’s 
knowledge, because their expertise may only become visible when it’s needed (eg 
when he/she improvises an appropriate response in a difficult or challenging 

© 2007 Straits Knowledge  

  

www.straitsknowledge.com 

2 

How to Conduct and Leverage an Expertise Audit 

situation). This is why in expertise audits and in expertise transfer exercises, it is 
more useful to focus on challenging or problematic incidents rather than on 
routine operations. Routine operations are less likely to reveal (or need) deep 
expertise.  
 
This is a key difference between an expertise audit (which often focuses on 
abnormal situations where expertise is likely to be needed and revealed) and a 
typical knowledge or information audit where you will usually be looking at the 
knowledge uses and knowledge needs in the “normal” operations and activities of 
a business. 
 
As we’ve seen, some aspects of the expert’s knowledge are easier to document 
than others, eg technical knowledge or routines. Some aspects require support 
from structured training. Some aspects (eg experience) are better picked up by 
observation – either direct observation through shadowing, or indirect 
observations via stories, examples, and case studies recounted by the expert. 
Other aspects of experience can only be learned for oneself by being exposed to 
learning environments and building up one’s own learning patterns, developing 
appropriate mental models, and becoming skilled at mental simulation and 
improvisation. 
 
Hence it’s essential in approaching an expertise audit to recognize that the 
knowledge that is embedded in experience cannot be completely documented or 
completely transferred. However, its transfer can be assisted and the growth 
of experience can be accelerated using knowledge management techniques. 
 
 

 
 
 

 

© 2007 Straits Knowledge  

  

www.straitsknowledge.com 

3 

How to Conduct and Leverage an Expertise Audit 

2. Conducting an Expertise Audit 
 
(a)  How to identify experts 
 
In principle, it should not be too difficult to figure out where your expertise is. 
Expertise and its most important ingredient experience are both embodied in 
people. Expertise does not lie in databases or document repositories (although 
the products of expertise might). So when you’re trying to locate expertise in 
your organization, you’re looking for people. And usually colleagues are aware of 
the experts in their midst. 
 
These people might be visible in a number of ways. They may be people who are 
very effective in challenging or complicated situations. They may be specialists 
who are recognized and consulted for advice or judgment in specific domains. 
They may have scarce knowledge or abilities. They may be recognised as 
valuable and important employees who would be difficult to replace. They may be 
considered as an authority in their subject domain and deferred to even if they do 
not have matching organisational status. All of these attributes are possible 
indicators of expertise, and these attributes can all be used as questions designed 
to point out expertise in your organisation (eg “Who in your department is 
regularly turned to for specialised advice in difficult or challenging situations?”). 
 
Notice however that some of these attributes may also be assigned automatically 
by staff to managers – and the attribution of advice, authority and deference may 
be more a function of their status than of their experience, knowledge or skill. If 
your audit looks like it is automatically including all managers as experts, your 
expertise audit may not be probing deeply enough and you may be confusing 
expertise with status, and missing important pockets of expertise. So if you use 
questions like the one above, you may need a follow up question such as “Do you 
have any such people who are not in management positions?”. 
 

 
By far the best way to find your experts is to go and ask the key operational 
people in each workgroup. By operational people I mean managers and 
supervisors who are close to the operation, plus people whom they nominate as 

 

© 2007 Straits Knowledge  

  

www.straitsknowledge.com 

4 

How to Conduct and Leverage an Expertise Audit 

knowing a lot about the workgroup and its operations. Between them they will 
almost always know who holds the important expertise and experience available. 
Some more sample questions to ask on these visits are given in the table below.  
 
In a very large organization where you don’t have the time or resources to visit 
every workgroup, or where you have lots of different types of expertise and 
experience and want to identify the most valuable or accessible experts, then you 
might want to use a more formal technique called social network analysis. This 
generally works via a survey to all staff, asking the expertise-locating questions 
we have already discussed (or ones taken from the table below). The names that 
are cited more frequently will indicate the people who are most recognized and/or 
turned to, and therefore potentially most important for your audit.  
 
For very large populations, you might want to use social network mapping 
software to process your results and produce network maps that will show quickly 
which experts are the most connected or referenced, which ones sit at the centre 
of self-contained groups, which ones are over-connected resulting in bottle-necks, 
which ones span group boundaries and act as brokers and connectors, and which 
ones are isolated and perhaps under-utilised. Each of these different types of 
expert will have different characteristics and will affect the strategies and 
interventions you might want to deploy in leveraging your expertise audit later 
on. 
 
 
Select the most appropriate questions from the list below to help locate important 
expertise and experience in your organization: 
 

1.  List the areas of technical knowledge that are critical for your 

department’s work. Who are the specialists in these areas? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.  What are the specialised skills required for your department’s work? Who 

in your department possesses these skills? 

3.  Which are the areas of work in your department that require extensive 

experience to be done effectively? How long does it take to build this 
experience (how many years)? What kind of experience is it? Who in your 
department possesses this experience? 

4.  Who in your department would you find it very difficult to replace or get 
along without? What is it they can do that nobody else/ few others can? 

5.  Who in your department has a track record of responding effectively in 

difficult or challenging situations important to the department’s work? 
What is it they can do that nobody else/ few others can? 

6.  Who in your department (apart from the manager) is frequently consulted 
for advice in tricky situations or to solve difficult problems related to your 
department’s work? 

7.  Does your department have any informally recognized experts or very 

experienced staff apart from formally designated managers or specialists? 
Who are they and what special expertise or experience do they have? 

8.  Which areas or expertise or experience are necessary and important for 
your department’s work? Who are the people who hold this expertise or 
experience?  

© 2007 Straits Knowledge  

  

www.straitsknowledge.com 

5 

How to Conduct and Leverage an Expertise Audit 

9.  Are there any areas of work in your department where you currently don’t 
have someone to provide the necessary expertise and experience? What is 
the expertise or experience you need and why the gap? 

 

10. Are there any emerging areas of expertise or experience that you 

anticipate will become important for the work of your department in the 
near future? What is the expertise and experience you need and where do 
you think it can be found or how can it be acquired? 

 
 
(b). Doing your homework in advance 
 
It is a good idea to do your research in advance and filter out the questions that 
are irrelevant so that you can cover more ground much faster. You may not need 
to visit every department and ask every manager every question, and should 
avoid that if you can. A preliminary analysis may tell you your most important 
expertise is really located in just a few areas of the organization, and may 
suggest the most likely places to focus your attention. You don’t want to have to 
ask busy people too many questions that may not be relevant. The more you can 
form an understanding of your target workgroups in advance of a visit or a 
survey, the better will be the quality of your data, and your understanding of its 
significance (note that several of the questions above have context-setting follow-
up questions to help you interpret the data later on). 
 
If you are fortunate, you may already have pre-work that will help you zoom in 
quickly on likely areas of expertise. The following activities can give you a 
preliminary orientation to give you starting data for an expertise audit, although 
you will still need to go into the field to ask detailed questions, because they may 
have missed expertise areas that turn out to be important to you. An expertise 
audit should always include field investigations, no matter how thorough the 
preliminary research. 
 
Input from 
 
Knowledge Audit 
 
A knowledge audit can give you very 
valuable input to prepare for an 
expertise audit, if it has consciously 
documented the tacit knowledge as 
well as the explicit knowledge required 
for your organization’s critical 
activities. The areas of knowledge you 
would look for in a knowledge map 
would be anything that refers to 
advanced skills, “tricks of the trade”, 
technical knowledge, experience or 
expertise. 
 
 
Competency Framework 
 
A competency mapping exercise across 
an organization may also provide 
valuable input because like a 
knowledge audit it usually provides a 
systematic survey of jobs and the 

Limitations 
 
 
 
Knowledge maps resulting from a 
knowledge audit most frequently 
document the knowledge assets 
required for the normal operational 
performance of different workgroups. 
They do not often capture the deeper 
knowledge, skills and experience 
required to deal with unusual or 
difficult situations, which is where 
availability of expertise is more 
important, and where deeper expertise 
is revealed. 

 
 
 
Competency frameworks or maps can 
be implemented with great variability 
in different organizations and may not 
capture all the aspects involved in 
expertise (especially the aspect of 

© 2007 Straits Knowledge  

  

www.straitsknowledge.com 

6 

How to Conduct and Leverage an Expertise Audit 

skills, technical knowledge and 
competencies required to perform well 
in those jobs. 
 

 
Corporate Taxonomy 
 
A corporate taxonomy or business 
classification scheme may provide a 
formal breakdown of the subject 
domains and activity areas that are 
critical to your organisation’s business. 
They can provide you with important 
domain areas to get you started. You 
would follow up by identifying the 
departments and workgroups where 
you might find the expertise and 
experience related to those subject 
domains. 
 

experience). They are often less 
sensitive to technical knowledge than 
knowledge maps are, and they are 
frequently conducted from a top-down 
analysis of the functions within an 
organization, which means that they 
may not discover emergent skills, 
experience and technical knowledge 
that grow naturally out of any given 
work context, but that may not be 
anticipated from a formal analysis of 
the business top down. Competency 
and knowledge maps are more likely to 
discover such emergent knowledge 
assets, if they are conducted “bottom 
up” through workshops with the 
operational staff. Like a knowledge 
map, competency maps may also focus 
on steady state needs, and may not 
capture the special expertise that is 
available or needed in unusual but 
challenging circumstances. 
 
 
 
 
Very much like the competency 
framework the corporate taxonomy is 
frequently derived from a formal 
analysis of the organization’s business, 
so provides a top-down view that may 
not fully reflect the full range of skills, 
technical knowledge and expertise that 
is required on the ground, especially 
for unusual but important situations. 
Corporate taxonomies tend to focus on 
obvious operational domains within the 
organization’s core business and their 
topic focus can be insensitive to 
“backroom” or non-subject focused 
skills and technical knowledge that may 
nevertheless be critical to the 
organization’s effectiveness (eg 
financial modeling, risk awareness, 
emotional intelligence, ability to size 
people up accurately). Competency 
frameworks tend to be better than 
taxonomies at picking up such 
backroom knowledge needs. 
Taxonomies are usually designed to 
manage explicit knowledge assets such 
as information resources and so they 
also tend to be insensitive to more tacit 
areas of knowledge such as experience. 
Taxonomies tend to reflect past and 
current knowledge asset collections and 
are not generally future-oriented. 

© 2007 Straits Knowledge  

  

www.straitsknowledge.com 

7 

How to Conduct and Leverage an Expertise Audit 

 
Expertise Directory 
 
You may be fortunate enough to have 
an existing expertise directory or a 
staff directory that encourages staff to 
list their areas of interest, skills and 
experience. These can provide 
important data especially if they have 
already been formally designated as 
experts and/or are using a 
standardized vocabulary such as a 
corporate taxonomy to describe their 
expertise. 
 

 
Communities of Practice  
 
Active communities that meet and 
interact regularly are useful ways of 
surfacing important expertise and 
experience within your organization. 
Over time, the members of the 
community become aware of who the 
informal experts and “wise” members 
of the community are, which members 
hold more authority than others, and 
whose judgment is most reliable. They 
are particularly useful for identifying 
expertise and experience that is not 
gathered together into particular 
functional work units but are scattered 
across an organization – eg 
procurement or marketing specialists. 
The community effectively becomes a 
mechanism for creating a clearer 
awareness of the tacit knowledge 
resources available across a group of 
scattered specialists.  
 

 
 
 
Expertise directories and staff 
directories are difficult to maintain and 
are therefore often irregular in their 
reliability and currency. If staff have 
been formally designated by managers 
as “experts” in the absence if a 
systematic expertise audit this may not 
fully reflect the reality on the ground 
(ie who is actually consulted or who 
actually has the experience). For 
example, individuals’ designation as 
“experts” may simply mean that these 
are the staff to be consulted as 
reference points for particular topics, 
and may not fully represent the full 
range or depth of experience and 
expertise truly available within a 
workgroup. If you have a self-reporting 
staff directory, expertise indicators can 
be misleading if staff have inconsistent 
understandings of what constitutes 
important expertise and skills, if they 
use inconsistent vocabulary to describe 
what they know, if they under-report 
their expertise in order to avoid being 
distracted from their duties by 
enquiries, or if they over-report so as 
to enhance their career profile. 
 
 
 
 
Strong communities sometimes form 
very narrow and limited views of what 
they think “true” expertise is, and this 
may restrict your field of view, missing 
out other important areas of expertise 
and experience. They may form a 
strong sense of orthodoxy, and fail to 
anticipate emerging needs or gaps. 
Communities also tend to exist to 
bridge cross-organisational scatter of 
knowledge and experience, and so may 
not be sensitive to the experience and 
expertise resident in functional 
departments. They should be used as a 
complement to looking at functionally 
organized workgroups, not as an 
alternative. 

© 2007 Straits Knowledge  

  

www.straitsknowledge.com 

8 

How to Conduct and Leverage an Expertise Audit 

 
Online Expertise Finders 
 
If specialists and experts use online 
discussion forums or weblogs to 
interact and share in your organisation, 
then they can also be useful places you 
can go to get a sense of who posts 
valuable materials, and who is deferred 
to or treated with greater respect by 
their peers. There are also automated 
tools that can crawl document 
repositories, list serves, bulletin 
boards, and even email servers, to 
identify highly visible and active 
contributors, and associate them with 
particular topic areas. 

 
 
 
The caution with online expertise 
finders is that visibility and activity 
(which is what the automated tools 
track) do not necessarily map to 
experience and expertise. This is easier 
to tell from manual analysis than with 
automated tools. Contributions and 
posting activity can be gamed to give 
higher visibility, and intensity of 
discussions could indicate 
argumentativeness and inexperience as 
much as expertise. The identification of 
expertise domains is also dependent on 
the natural language that contributors 
use to describe their topics so if that 
varies, then the expertise domains may 
not be identified consistently (unless a 
standard taxonomy is being used to tag 
contributions). As with self reporting 
staff directories, “true” experts may not 
be highly visible in the public or online 
domain, and the tools assume that the 
application of expertise is going to be 
frequent and visible. It often isn’t. 
 

 
The resources listed above can all provide a useful orientation to prepare for an 
expertise audit, and between them they should help you figure where you should 
go looking first, and who you should talk to. Being aware of their limitations will 
help you focus your own efforts on answering the questions that they do not 
address. For example, if you have a competency framework and are confident 
that it has been validated on the ground with operationally aware managers and 
staff, you may not need to look in any depth for skills-based expertise, but should 
probably build questions designed to surface experience and expertise areas not 
already captured in the competency framework.  
 
Because expertise is highly subjective and resides mainly as a tacit (and therefore 
only partially visible) resource, the golden rule in an expertise audit is not to trust 
any single information source – but to use multiple channels to build a composite 
picture of the expertise and experience available and needed in your organization. 
 
 
(c). Prioritising your expertise transfer efforts 
 
Your preliminary homework will give you a rough map of the important areas of 
expertise and experience that you need to go find out more about. Your visits or 
survey questions or social network analysis will help you flesh out the missing 
parts, ensure that your expertise audit actually reflects the ground situation and 
emerging or future needs, and they will help you put names to each expertise 
domain. 
 
You will also need to collect information that will help you judge the criticality of 
the expertise and experience you uncover – ie the degree to which you should 

© 2007 Straits Knowledge  

  

www.straitsknowledge.com 

9 

How to Conduct and Leverage an Expertise Audit 

prioritise effort in acquiring, transferring or growing this expertise. Four factors 
are important signals of critical expertise areas: 
 

•  The usefulness of the expertise as applied to the organization’s business 
•  The need to spread this expertise more widely 
•  The nature of the expertise and relative difficulty/slowness of transferring 

or replacing it 

•  The risk of losing the expertise in the near future eg through staff 

movement, retirement, job turnover 

 
A table something like the one below can help you identify the areas where you 
need to focus your efforts and protect or acquire vulnerable or missing expertise. 
You can use it to do a first cut prioritization of your expertise areas, but do not 
use it mechanically just adding up scores. The scores simply give you a first draft 
that should be sense checked against your observations in your visits and 
interviews. For each numerical assessment you should be recording narrative 
reasons to justify the score. You may want to involve a small core team to 
complete the first draft of your assessment – between them the members should 
be familiar with all the main areas of the business, and should have been involved 
in the conduct of some aspect of the expertise audit so far. 
 
Your first draft of the prioritized list now needs to be checked with your key 
management stakeholders in the exercise (ie the ones you have consulted) and 
your final prioritization exercise should preferably be conducted in a workshop 
where the stakeholders can form a common view together of where the top 
priorities lie. Finally, you will need to get your senior management team’s input 
on the key priorities (i) so that they can give input on strategic imperatives facing 
the organization, and (ii) because some of the follow-up strategies may require 
new resources or policies that require their consent and support. 
 

Expertise/ 
Experience 

Area 

How 

How 

How difficult 

important for 

important  to 

or time 

the 

business?  

Eg score  

1 (minor) to  

5 (major) 

spread it?  
Eg score   
1 (just a few 
people ok) to  
5 (a lot more 
people need to 

have it) 

consuming is 
it going to be 
to transfer? 

Eg score 1 
(easy) to 5 
(very hard) 

What is the 
risk of losing 

it? 

Eg score 1 
(low, eg 4-5 
years) to 5 
(high, within 
the next year) 

Urgency of 
Expertise 
Transfer 

Need  

(High Med or 
Low Priority 

based on 
scores) 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

© 2007 Straits Knowledge  

  

www.straitsknowledge.com 

10 

How to Conduct and Leverage an Expertise Audit 

3. Leveraging the Expertise Audit 
 
By this stage you should have a short list of priority or “critical” expertise areas 
that you want to work on protecting or building or transferring. Now you’ll need 
to consider how you develop appropriate strategies. There are four main 
strategies for dealing with expertise gaps or needs, the first two focused on 
acquiring “ready-made” expertise and the second two focused on growing that 
expertise organically: 
 

(a) Engage consultants 
(b) Recruit experts or experienced individuals to join your staff 
(c) Provide relevant training and education opportunities 
(d) Deliberately build the experience of your staff through exposure 

and knowledge transfer 

 
In practice, you may need to deploy a combination of these strategies. 
 
(a). Engage consultants 
 
You may want to engage consultants where you have a critical expertise 
requirement that is not expected to be a long term need, and requires fairly 
limited interventions. The advantages are that the costs of expertise can be 
contained, the expertise can be made available to you very rapidly, you can shop 
around for the most appropriate combination of experience and expertise for your 
needs, external consultants can bring different and new perspectives, and can 
expose you to knowledge needs and opportunities that you had not previously 
anticipated. 
 
However if you are likely to continue to need elements of this experience and 
expertise after the consultants’ intervention, you may be letting yourself in for 
disappointment. Because a great deal of expertise relies on a tacit experience 
base built over time consulting engagements present great difficulties in 
supporting deep expertise transfer or experience building. They can be successful 
where the required expertise is expressed through well-defined technical 
knowledge, clearly understood skills, or routines that can be captured in simple 
methodologies or templates, but the more that their application relies on deep 
experience, the less satisfactory the expertise transfer – and therefore the long 
term gains from the engagement – will be. It is always worth a serious 
assessment whether your organization will continue to require specialised 
expertise and experience in order to fully benefit from the consultants’ 
intervention after they have left. If so, then perhaps one of the slower and 
longer-term expertise strategies might be more suitable. 
 
(b). Recruit experts 
 
If you are clear that you have a longer term need for an area of expertise and 
either don’t have enough of it or can’t build it organically fast enough to meet 
your needs, then you might consider recruiting new talent. The advantages are 
that it is still relatively fast to acquire “pre-grown” expertise through recruitment 
compared to trying to grow it internally, and again (depending on availability) you 
can shop around for the best mix to suit your needs. Like consultants, newly 
recruited experts can bring valuable new perspectives to your organization. 
 
Although recruited experts can be brought on board relatively quickly, they may 
not get up to speed quite so quickly, as it may take them some time to tune 
themselves into your organization and its needs. If this is a new or very poorly 
represented area of expertise in your organization, there will be very little 

© 2007 Straits Knowledge  

  

www.straitsknowledge.com 

11 

How to Conduct and Leverage an Expertise Audit 

infrastructure to help them perform at their true level of capability, and they will 
likely be performing at sub-optimal levels until they and the organization can 
build the necessary infrastructure to support them and tune into each others’ 
strengths and needs.  
 
If it is an already well-established area of expertise and experience then it is 
important to monitor for “soft” human factors such as competitive behaviours, 
trust, respect, sense of authority, and collegiality. This is especially true for highly 
technical or experiential areas of expertise where personal judgment is a very 
strong factor, where differences of opinion and strongly held opinions are 
common, and in contexts such as succession planning where incumbents may see 
a threat or challenge in the new recruit. In such situations it is usually valuable if 
the incumbent experts are also involved in the selection of the new candidate. 
 
(c). Provide training and education 
 
This strategy works best for expertise based primarily on the ingredients of 
technical knowledge and skills. No expertise can be completely divorced from 
experience-building, however, so this strategy needs to be combined with job-
placement and career planning strategies, where the candidates are deliberately 
exposed to responsibilities roles and projects that are designed to build their 
expertise in the critical areas, and also designed to provide a context where they 
can apply the technical knowledge and/or skills they are developing through 
formal training/ education. Such strategies also make a strong positive statement 
about the organisation’s commitment to its staff and their future, and they have 
the advantage that the expertise is being grown in staff who are familiar with the 
culture, context and needs of their organization, and so in principle should be 
able to use their growing expertise with great precision and facility. 
 
This is obviously a much slower expertise growing strategy than the previous two. 
It assumes the ability to plan and manage careers in the long term despite 
changes in strategy, policy and market conditions, and so is likely to work best in 
very stable organizations, in rapidly growing organizations, or in very large 
organizations where opportunities for career progression are more frequently 
available and also foreseeable. It may not work quite so well in competitive job 
markets where the expertise-growth you are investing in today could easily walk 
away of a competitor decides to grow its expertise by recruitment. Growing 
expertise from within may also constrain your experts’ awareness of new and 
emerging knowledge needs, unless they are deliberately exposed to experience 
and perspectives from outside the organization eg by participation in industry 
groups, professional associations, university-based education, external job 
attachments, etc. 
 
(d). Experience-building and Knowledge Transfer 
 
The Experience-building strategy has many of the advantages and disadvantages 
of the Training and Education strategy above, the major difference being that it is 
slower and less well-defined. Technical knowledge and skills can be specified 
more clearly in a way that “experience” in a particular domain cannot. Hence 
career planning and job placement is less easy to specify, and expectations and 
sense of progress are less easy to define and monitor. They remain very much an 
issue of judgment and skill in the organization’s leadership. 
 
However, this strategy can be enhanced and accelerated by combining deliberate 
exposure to experience eg through the use of succession planning, with the use 
of knowledge transfer strategies. While experiential knowledge cannot be 

© 2007 Straits Knowledge  

  

www.straitsknowledge.com 

12 

How to Conduct and Leverage an Expertise Audit 

replaced by codified knowledge or even knowledge sharing activity, the 
acquisition of useful experience can be accelerated by the use of such strategies. 
 
Some example knowledge transfer strategies that can accelerate experience-
building include: 
 

•  Communities of practice or other forms of facilitated group sessions 

where experts can discuss the things they pay attention to, their learning 
experiences, their routines and tricks of the trade and how they have dealt 
with challenges, observed or questioned by novices 

•  Storytelling sessions or interviews where experts describe challenging 

situations, how they interpreted them, how they responded, and what 
they learned 

•  Mentoring, shadowing and coaching where experts guide less 

experienced staff in what to pay attention to, how to anticipate unfolding 
events, and how to respond appropriately 

•  Training simulations and decision games, where novices are taken 
through scenarios that require experience to navigate effectively, thus 
gathering experience by proxy and getting feedback on their performance 

•  Structured interviews designed to elicit the key components of what 

experts pay attention to, their sense of typicality, how they detect 
anomalies, how they form judgments and make decisions in challenging 
situations 

•  Platforms for asking and answering questions such as bulletin 
boards, FAQ databases or expertise directories with email or instant 
messaging links 

 
In considering the knowledge sharing strategies to deploy it is worth considering 
a number of key questions that may affect the quality of the expert’s 
participation: 
 

•  Does the expert have sufficient time allocated for the knowledge transfer 

activities? 

•  Do the working patters of the expert make it easy or difficult to participate 

in the intended transfer activities? 

•  Are you, the expert and the learner sufficiently clear about the specific 

knowledge to be transferred and why? 

•  Does the expert consider this time productive and well spent? 
• 
•  Will the expert feel threatened in any way by the knowledge transfer 

Is the knowledge gap between expert and learner too large? 

• 

activity? 
Is the expert temperamentally tuned to the style of sharing activity (eg 
group sharing, writing answers to questions, telling stories? 

•  Does the expert have a stake in the success of the knowledge transfer 

activity? 
Is the expert interested in the knowledge to be transferred? 

• 
•  What motivates the expert, and is this motivation aligned with the 

knowledge transfer need? 

•  Are the continuing learning and experience building needs of the expert 

also being met? 

 
Your answers to these questions may influence the choice of transfer strategies, 
as well as other policy or process measures you might need to put in place for the 
transfer activities to proceed as desired. 
 
 
Patrick Lambe, 28 October 2007 

© 2007 Straits Knowledge  

  

www.straitsknowledge.com 

13 

